--- Page 1 ---
Information and
Communication Technology
Classes Nine Nn
gr = F CS
P ~~ gs A : N vi
2 | [4 -
| 1 ail | |
os \ f nak
Aaa
WALSE
A \ pe ) |
5 g2 ° a ad
\ # > ~ ‘a
5 » _ { y 4
5 or v Lz
{ - & atl : — a ;
National Curriculum and Textbook Board, Bangladesh


--- Page 2 ---
Prescribed by the National Curriculum and Textbook Board
as a textbook for classes nine and ten from the academic year 2015
Information and Communication Technology
Classes Nine and Ten
Revised for the year 2025
NATIONAL CURRICULUM AND TEXTBOOK BOARD, BANGLADESH


--- Page 3 ---
Published by
National Curriculum and Textbook Board
69-70, Motijheel Commercial Area, Dhaka
[All rights reserved by the publisher]
First edition written, edited and translated by
Dr. Muhammed Zafar Iqbal
Dr. Suraiya Parveen
Mustafa Jabbar
Munir Hasan
Lutfur Rahman
Md. Munabbir Hossain
Sharif Atiquzzaman
First Publication : September, 2014
Revised Edition : August, 2015
Revised Edition : October, 2024
For free distribution by the Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh
Printed by :


--- Page 4 ---
Preface
The importance of formal education is diversified. The prime goal of modern education
is not to impart knowledge only but to build a prosperous nation by developing skilled
human resources. At the same time. education is the best means of developing a society
free from superstitions and adheres to science and facts. To stand as a developed nation
in the science and technology-driven world of the 21st century, we need to ensure
quality education. A well-planned education is essential for enabling our new
generation to face the challenges of the age and to motivate them with the strength of
patriotism, values, and ethics. In this context, the government is determined to ensure
education as per the demand of the age.
Education is the backbone of a nation and a curriculum provides the essence of formal
education. Again. the most important tol for implementing a curriculum is the
textbook. The National Curriculum 2012 has been adopted to achieve the goals of the
National Education Policy 2010. In light of this, the National Curriculum and Textbook
Board (NCTB) has been persistently working on developing, printing, and distributing
quality textbooks. This organization also reviews and revises the curriculum, textbook,
and assessment methods according to needs and realities.
Secondary education is a vital stage in our education system. This textbook is catered
to the age, aptitude, and endless inquisitiveness of the students at this level, as well as
to achieve the aims and objectives of the curriculum. It is believed that the book written
and meticulously edited by experienced and skilled teachers and experts will be
conducive to a joyful experience for the students. It is hoped that the book will play a
significant role in promoting creative and aesthetic spirits among students along with
subject knowledge and skills.
The education policy has made Information and Communication Technology
compulsory in all streams of the education from grade VI and XII to introduce the
concepts as in acquiring literacy in this subject well as to make the students proficient
in information and comnunication technology. The curriculum and textbooks of this
subject have been developed in accordance with this. Hopefully, the textbook of
Information and Communication Technolopy for class IX and X will play a significant
tole to make students interested in this subject along with acquiring literacy m
Information and Communication Technology and creating scope for new jobs.
It may be mentioned here that due to the changing situation in 2024 and as per the
needs the textbook has been reviewed and revised for the academic year 2025. It is
mentionable here that the last version of the textbook developed according to the
curriculum 2012 has been taken as the basis. Meticulous attention has been paid to the
textbook to make it more learner-friendly and error-free. However, any suggestions for
further improvement of this book will be appreciated.
Finally. I would like to thank all of those who have contributed to the book as writers,
editors, reviewers, illustrators and graphic designers.
October, 2024 Prof. Dr. A K M Reazul Hassan
Chairman
National Curriculum and Textbook Board, Bangladesh


--- Page 5 ---
Contents
Chapter Title Pages
Information and Communication Technology and ]
Hat Our Bangladesh 1-17
fia
me weiss 56-68
ww Multimedia and Graphics 60-114
Problem Solving through Programming 115-141


--- Page 6 ---
First Chapter
Information and Communication Technology
and Our Bangladesh
bangladesh gov.bd ——
Protmn =a 7
Mm wwe wey bovenu came wee Desh fem wef ve ww oegs ww
weer sown 31 reves wes
€ i
cane (NEE IT
ht CER oF © =m
ow due=eull Gil, fem afew aE
RS criciance Routes rates
wr © wna
Ef oR # om
wn ene ei wml Sfnim ve 0 woe evan
YY oak Esso
r— PE. eof fe ee fe 2 3
(6 www v |
oo
After completing this chapter, we will be able to —
# explain the significance of ICT;
# explain the contributions of the people related with ICT;
# explain the importance of e-learning in Bangladesh:
# explain the necessity of e-governance in Bangladesh;
# explain the importance of e-service in Bangladesh;
# explain the importance of e-commerce in Bangladesh;
# analyse the prospect of ICT in job-sectors in Bangladesh;
# explain the role of ICT in social networking;
» explain the positive aspects of ICT in entertainment;
% explain the future image of an IC'T oriented Bangladesh;
» design a poster on an ICT oriented Bangladesh.
Forma-1, ICT {3-10}


--- Page 7 ---
2 Information and Communication Technology
The 21st Century and Information and Communication Technology
The concept of wealth that prevailed in the last century has radically changed.
The whole world rightly acknowledges that the wealth of the 21% century is
knowledge. It means that neither agriculture, mineral resources and energy, nor
industry and business are the sources of wealth. Human beings are because they
are capable of searching knowledge. This concept has reshaped the people's way
of thinking throughout the world. They have been taking preparations to face the
challenges of the 21st century.
We have already started realising that the world of the 21st century is making its
firm standing on a knowledge-based economy. In this century, two more
important factors - globalisation and internationalisation have come into being.
and ICT is the main driving force behind their acceleration. Now the
geographical border of a country transcends and extends to all parts of the world
as an effect of globalisation. We can refer to Bangladesh as an example to make
the point clear. Millions of Bangladeshis now live all over the world. The place
where they live in is as if a small Bangladesh. So, in one sense, the border of
Bangladesh has extended beyond its own ane. Moreover, they. in spite of being
the natives of Bangladesh, are living as the citizens of different countries.
'Internationalism’ is the unwritten law of the present world.
Once people had to depend on the blessings of nature for survival. However, by
mventing machines and tools, they have lessened this dependence. With the help
of machines and technology, they have controlled the world economy after the
Industrial Revolution in the 18th and 19th century. The nations. which
participated in the industrial revolution, once ruled the world. A similar shift of
power has been observed. as the knowledge-based economy has started
dominating the world in the 21st century. Ey, CE.
We can realise that we should take ll A 2:
adequate preparation for taking part in this .
revolution. The specific skills for survival ja Se of gd "TS BEES eF
arc the ability to cooperate and by 1 uF a
communicate with each other, awareness = fs -= Ji =
about the obligations of the citizenry, I. K a
acumen In solving problems, critical i = i

po thinking, creativity, and skill in ICT. ul

ES ICT Competition


--- Page 8 ---
Information and Communication Technology and Our Bangladesh 3
In fact, skill in ICT has emerged as the most important technological skill.
Everyone should have the basic computer literacy to survive in the 21% century.
Only then, one may have access to ils amazing world. Unless students acquire
the ICT skills, they may not generate new knowledge by collecting. analysing,
and evaluating information. In fact, without the skill, they can never face the
challenges in the 21% century and position themselves in the knowledge based
society.
Great ICT Personalities
Many scientists, visionaries and engineers have
contributed significantly to the development of -
Information and Communication Technology. Cable :
connection and the wireless system, acceleration of J
computers’ counting power and the development of
microelectronics have ensured rapid growth of ICT. e
Charles Babbage (1791-1871). an English engineer ] /
and mathematician, first introduced and developed
computer. He is regarded as the father of the modern
computer. He invented Difference Engine In 1991, in
the Science Museum of London, an engine was made Li)
according to the design of Babbage. and it worked
i) Charles Babbage
properly as expected and later, he designed a
calculating machine called Analytical Engine.
=? wr | Ada Lovelace (1815-1852), the daughter of poet
Lord Byron, first thought about how the process of
od calculation could be made more effective. She
z became interested in science and mathematics since
L her childhood and was encouraged by her mother.
2 i When she met Charles Babbage in 1833. she
F pre brought before him the concept of ‘programming’ to
Ee use in his analytical engine. That is why Ada
fi av / 1 Lovelace is honoured as the pioneer of
fF programming concept. Babbage delivered a lecture
po about his engine in 1840 at Turin University. Then
lili Ada with the help of Babbage, explained the ways .,
Ada Lovelace how the engine could work. She marked it in a 8


--- Page 9 ---
4 Information and Communication Technology
numerical order, while describing its mede of working. In 1953, when the note
was published again one hundred years after the death of Ada, the scientist
realised that it was Ada who put forward the idea about the Algorithm of
programming.
Tmportant progress was made in physics during ——
that period with the inventions of Babbage and So N
Ada. Scientist James Clerk Maxwell (1831-1879), b Ey A
combining the electric energy and magnetic force, aN
put forth the theory of Electromagnetic Force jh bl E
which opened a possibility of sending wireless | SHEE
messages from one place to another. \ [ 4
gas Bengali scientist \ vy
-_ Jagadish Chandra i
oa. Bose (1858-1937) James Clerk Maxwell
<7 became successful for the first time in sending
wireless messages from one place to another. In
1895, he successfully did it by using microwave.
=) But, Italian scientist
pi - Guglielmo Marconi
i ad (1874-1937) 2:
succeeded first in »
Jagadish Chandra Bose doing the same work hr b
by radiowave. However, in 1997, the Institute of =
Electrical and Electronic Engineering (IEE) 4
recognized him as a pioneer and one of the
| —r inventors of radio
a { _ Jl| science. That is why
& EY he is acknowledged as
EEF || the inventor of radio.
i aY In the 20th century, after Guglielmo Marconi
3 the development of electronics, IBM Company was
the first to build the mainframe computer after the
development of electronics. In 1971, cost-saving
J computers were made. With the invention of the
5 Raymond Samiel E— microprocessor, it became easier to make affordable
= computers. In the 60s and 70s, using the Internet


--- Page 10 ---
Information and Communication Technology and Our Bangladesh 5
Protocol, Arpanet was invented. The inter connection among the computers
through network started developing since then, and the invention of the internet
was the outcome. In 1971, American programmer Raymond Samuel Tomlinson
introduced the first electronic mail communication through ARPANET. He is
the pioneer of inventing the e-mail system.
[ | After the invention of the microprocessor,
personal computer was made by using this
device in the USA. Steve Jobs (1955-2011)
and his two friends Steve Wozniak and
Ronald Wayne started a company named
Apple Computer on April 1, 1976. This
company 1s one of the biggest organisations
in the world. The development of the
personal computer has been carried out by
Steve Jobs this company.
1 | IBM company put the responsibility of
a” developing the operating system for
4 & | | personal computers on *Microsoft’ of William
! 4 | Henry Gates or Bill Gates (Born on October
" | | 26, 1955). They succesfully developed MS
. DOS and Windows operating system. At
> | | present, most of the computers of the world
William Henry Gates | | are run by the operating system software of
| Microsoft company of Bill Gates.
In 1989, during the development of the internet, a 5
British computer scientist proposed and later on |3 Li )
successfully invented information management by TY
using Hypertext Transfer Protocol (http). Sir |{ yl
Timothy John Berners Lee is known as the || ~
pioneer of the World Wide Web (WWW). For its ||§ A
development the Tnternet technology spread out _— ~
throughout the world. A strong economic field has a NS .
been created on the Internet and different types of |
application software have been developed. Timothy John Berners Lee o
3


--- Page 11 ---
[3 Information and Communication Technology
The most popular social networking system in the
world is Facebook. A student of Harvard University.
Mark Zuckerberg (Born on May 14, 1984) and his
four friends are the pioneers of creating the social
networking system Facebook. Al first, it was used
only by the university students. But now many people

- of the world are using Facebook. Many people in our
Bangladesh use Facebook for social networking
Mark Zuckerberg too.

E-learning and Bangladesh
For years, knowledge has been acquired across the world in traditional methods.
The innovation and development of ICT have brought about changes for the first
time in these methods. We have become familiar with the terms like e-learning
and Distance Learning. E-learning is the short version of electronic leaning
which basically means a teaching process by using CD-ROM, the Internet,
personal network and TV channels. However, we should keep in mind that
e-learning is not an alternative to the conventional way of learning. For example,
itis hard to demonstrate in class different scientific and natural phenomena, such
as, a solar eclipse, a lunar eclipse, and so on. A teacher may demonstrate these
phenomena with images, videos, and graphs with the help of multi-media. The
class can be interactive too.

Bangladesh has a huge population, and that is why the class size is usually big.

The schools in our countiy lack skilled teachers. teaching and learning materials,

science laboratories, etc. The students do not have a wide scope of doing

scientific experiments. E-learning can play a vital role to solve these problems.

A lesson conducted by a skilled teacher may be recorded and distributed to

hundreds of schools. Different learning materials for teaching a specific subject

can be given lo students. Teachers themselves may make their lessons more
effective and these lessons may be reused in other classes. Many terchers of

Bangladesh are using e-learning materials.

., Teaching and learning materials are made for e-learning all over the world.
2 Renowned universities of the world have introduced some online courses and


--- Page 12 ---
Information and Communication Technology and Our Bangladesh 7
anybody can take any of these courses. A learner can take the course either by
submitting his homework or sitting for examination online, and can get the
requisite credit. Research is going on to develop the field.

Bangladesh is not lagging behind in e-learning. The ICT specialists of the
country have opened some web portals offering courses in Bangla, and learners
from any part of the world can take the courses. The ICT oriented, specifically
training courses in computer programming, have earned popularity at home and
abroad.

E-learning can play a vital role in over-coming the limitations of teaching in
Bangladesh. However, it is not a substitute of the conventional teaching method
of a ¢lassroom in which teachers and students have face-to-face interactions,
exchange of opinions. and question and answer sessions. Moreover, students can
ask questions, interact, and help themselves in learning something. In addition,
teachers and students can assist each other in the leaming process and optimise
their learning by peer-bonding. By contrast, possibilities of interactions are
minimal in e-learning. As e-learning requires little human participation, it may
become mechanical. Therefore, in order to make e-learning successful, students
need to be very pro-active. E-learning has a wide scope in Bangladesh as we can
minimise the limitations in classroom teaching by adopting e-learning.
However, implementation of e-learning practices in classroom will require fast
internet connectivity, necessary infra-structure, and e-learning materials. The
present Government is developing this type of teaching learning materials. It will
help our students to achieve Global standard.

Group Activity

Discuss in group and present how e-learning can play a vital role in the
development of education.

E-Governance and Bangladesh

Transparency and accountability are needed for a good governance. A modern,
transparent. and accountable governance cen be ensured by introducing a digital
system, It will ensure good governance, stop the harassment of the citizen, and
pave the way of good governance. The application of electronic or digital 9
method in the government administration 1s called e-governance. a


--- Page 13 ---
8 Information and Communication Technology
Once, it was very difficult for the examinees and their guardians to collect the
result of a public examination. It was even more difficult for the people living in
the remote villages. Even two decades ago they could not collect their results a
week after the publication of the result. Now they can get it either through the
internet or the SMS option of the mobile phone. So, the trouble of instantly
collecting the result has come to an end.
Another example of e-governance 1s the facility of submitting applications to the
higher educational institutions with the help of the mobile phone. Previously if a
candidate of Jessore wanted to apply to Shahjalal University of Science and
Technology, he had to complete a series ol formalities. Candidates or their
representatives had to travel to Sylhet in order to collect and submit university
admission application forms. Now candidates may submit their applications
through mobile phones. They need not to travel from one city to another.
District offices of the Deputy Commissioners have E-service Centres in order to
ensure easy, affordable, and hassle-free services. Now a service delivery of a
services that took 2-3 weeks in the past now takes only 2-5 days. On top of it,
digitalisation of the information has reduced the time in decision malking by.
Government departments have become transparent and accountable in
providing their services and increased their efficiency in issuing copies of deeds
and settlement records.
The manual process of paying gas, electricity and water bills is time-consuming
and troublesome. Sometimes the busy hours of a day are spent to pay the utility
bills. Now the bills can be paid either online or through cell phones. The target
of the Government is te ensure better life standards and a hassle-free life for its
citizens, E-governance has made some services accessible 24 hours a day, seven
days a week, 365 days a year. Some of these services, for example, are ATM
services, mobile banking, information services, etc. As a result, citizens may
avail the service at their convenience.
In addition, with the introduction of e-services and inter-departmental
communication, net-working within the Government has increased. Government
employees have also become skilled. As a result. providing faster service has
become easier.

g


--- Page 14 ---
Information and Communication Technology and Our Bangladesh 9

Bangladesh has introduced e-governance for a few years. E-service is yet to be

introduced to all sectors of the governance. With its successful implementation

in every sector, Bangladesh will certainly ensure good governance.

E-Service and Bangladesh

Many government and non-government [oreepE————

service providing organisations provide | Toi

the citizens with temporary and full He | = wes mrm to ima tiem

services. This might be travelling from | Loo
one place to another or issuing duplicate | Sas = —

records of a land. Before the introduction a —

of the digital system, the services seekers | Sse

had to meet the service provider, but | = = ]

now they can receive the services through er —

the internet or mobile phones while | Sims fined hl
staying at home. For example, they | corecmrmeme sim creme
can purchase tickets through the | Ef rmrme—rmmpne es ———

internet. or mobile phone. People, a few | Sf i

days ago, had to go physically to Kamlapur train station. and stand in the queue

before the counters for rickets. This system is still in practice, but now anyone
can collect tickets and pay the fares online. Providing services through an
electronic system is called e-service. E-service ensures availability of services at
low cost in the shortest possible time without much hassle. E-service has already
been introduced to several ministries. departments and directorates of the

Government of Bangladesh,

The digital edition of textbooks. e-seftlement records, e-permit, e-ticket,

telemedicine, e-tin registration and income tax calculation, etc. are the

examples of e-services.

A. E-permit: It is one of the primary e-services of the country. The sugar cane
farmers of fifteen sugar-mills of the country get e-permit through the
message option of the cell phone. An e-permit is the official permission of the
sugar mills authority for the farmers to supply sugar canes at a fixed time.
The harassment of the farmers has come to an end as they receive the
information of supplying sugar canes through SMS. The production of the
sugar mills has also been increased due to timely supply of sugar canes. Po

gS
ES
Forma-2,1CT, (5-10)


--- Page 15 ---
10 Information and Communication Technology

B. Electronic Money Transfer System (MTS): Money can be sent at a low
cost from one place to another quickly and safely through the electronic
money transfer system of the Bangladesh Postal Department. It is possible to
transfer BDT 50000 in one minute. This service is available im all
post-offices in Bangladesh.

C. E-settlement Records : The duplicate of land settlement records can be
collected through this service. Previously employees of the land settlement
department would supply the information to the applicants from big record
books after filling up the prescribed forms. The applicants had to be present
physically in the office and the employees of the concerned department
would prepare it manually. Because of the e-service, applicants at home and
abroad can receive the settlement records, paying the required fees.

D. E-healtheare: Physicians in government health centres give advice on
mobile phones. That is why government hospitals have been provided with
mobile phones. Any citizen of the country can get the advice of any
physician. Besides. in some hospitals. telemedicine service has been
introduced. Because of the telemedical services, patient in upazila may
avail the service and advice of medical specialists in district hospitals on
mobile phones.

E. E-tiketing and Mobile Ticketing of Railway: Tickets of some intercity
trains can be collected either through mobile phone or online. As a result,
travellers can purchase the ticket at their convenience without going to the
ticket counters of the railway station. They can reach the station just before
the departure of the train and collect the printed ticket from a particular
counter,

E-commerce and Bangladesh

There is no substitute for trade and business for the progress and creation of jobs

in a country. A change has been brought about in the business sector of

Bangladesh for the electronic innovation of digital technology and the internet

and exchanging process besides paper currency. Running a business through an

electronic medium is known as e-commerce.

There are some terms and conditions in business. Firstly, the sellers must have

the commodity. Secondly, the buyers will pay the price of the product. This

transaction requires direct communication of the seller and buyer. However, in

the era of internet, nowadays sellers may create a website and display the =

2
S


--- Page 16 ---
Information and Communication Technology and Our Bangladesh 11
images of their products. The buyers, after choosing the commodity, pay the
price and get it. The buyers have the facilities to pay the price through debit
and credit cards, They can pay through mobile banking even. Thirdly, on
receipt of the payment, the sellers either deliver the products themselves or by
the courier. Another payment method is through courier service after receiving
the price.
The bill payment can also be done in the Cash on Delivery (COD) method,
which is different from mobile banking and debit or credit card payment. The
purchaser choose the product from the website of the seller and orders for
supply. The seller after getting the order sends it to the buyer who pays the bill
after receiving it.
E-commerce has been gradually increasing in Bangladesh since 2011-12. Now
everything including books. garments, food, luxurious goods, ele. is sold or
bought through e-commerce. Two types of establishments are noticed in
e-commerce like a conventional business. One kind of establishment sells only
its own products and another kind sells the products of different companies. You
have already watched advertisements of some websites on the internet,
television and in the newspaper.
ICT in the Job Sector of Bangladesh
Nowadays. the multifarious use and impact of ICT in the job sector is noticed
in Bangladesh like other countries. The impact and capacity of ICT are
gradually increasing. Two types of impact of ICT are noticed. First. the
introduction of TCT in the prevailing working sectors has enhanced the skills of
the employees and extended the market. Second , ICT itself has created new
job-opportunities,
The use of ICT in the prevailing existing job sector and old business sectors, on
the one hand, has enhanced the efficiency, transparency and accountability of the
professional groups; on the other hand, has increased the standard of service.
Skill in ICT is now regarded as the elementary qualification for any job.
Employees of banks, insurance, multinational companies, and government
sectors need to be skilled in word processing, presentation software, internet
browsing, email management, analytical software, etc. In addition, they have to
develop expertise in a specific software product, such as banking software. On
top of it, ICT has created a large job market of making hardware, software,
developing websites, maintenance, etc. Now it is a big market for the skilled

° workers who can work at home or abroad and set up their own ICT firms.

2

=


--- Page 17 ---
12 Information and Communication Technology

A major part of the task can be accomplished at home. Many people earn
foreign currency for the country through outsourcing.
Social Networking and ICT
Social mobility and development require communication amongst individual
human beings. Se, social communication means interaction among people
through virtual communication and networking. In other words, what people
create and exchange to communicate and express by using the internet and ICT
is called social networking. Now this communication has become easier.
cost-effective and usually safe. By using the internet, e-mail. mobile phone and
messaging system, blogging and platforms of social networking, the ICT based
social networking has been made easy. Platforms have been set up on the
internet, known as social networking, Such as Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, Instagram
gte. Two most popular social networking websites are Facebook and twitter.

» www.lacebook.com: Facebook is a website of the social networking system.
Mark Zuckerberg along with some of his friends launched this site. Anyone
can be a member of Facebook without any subscription. The users can add
[riends, send messages. update their personal information and give status and
share information with others. Besides, audios and videos can be sent through
itl. Any organisation can open its home page on Facebook, and at the same
time, like-minded people can form a Facebook group. According to
www.stastica.com report of April, 2024 , the number of Facebook usersinthe
world was 3.05 billion.

» www.twitter.com or X : Twitter is a social network too, but it has a basic
difference with Facebook. The users have to express themselves and exchange opinions
within 140 characters. That is why it can be called a website of micro
blogging. The message of 140 words is called the "Tweet. The tweets of
Twitters are displayed on their profile page. The members of the twitter can
follow other members to read ihe tweets. Those who follow a member are
called followers.

+ www.instagram.com: Instagram is a popular social media platform launched
in 2010 with a focus on photo and video sharing. Ii allows users to create
stories and search for content via hashtags. It also includes (Reels) and shop-
ping opportunities, through which brands and influencers can effectively
engage with their followers or visitors. It is considered as one of the leading
platforms for digital marketing.” -

g
5


--- Page 18 ---
Information and Communication Technology and Our Bangladesh 13
Entertainment and ICT
With the development of ICT, a new era in the entertainment world has started.
It has occurred in two ways, First, how people consume entertainment has
fundamentally changed. Second, different media of entertainment have
qualitatively changed.
Let us see first how individual media consumption habit has transformed in
response 10 the changes in ICT. Once, people had to go outside for
entertainment. If they wanted to enjoy a [ilm, they had to go to the cinema hall
to enjoy a film; to the playground to watch a football match; to a concert to listen
to music. Nowadays. there is no need to go outside for entertainment. Radio was
invented first, and then the television. The computer came eventually. The
Internet is the latest addition to the computer. We have discovered that people
can enjoy all kinds of entertainment within the four walls of their home. When
computer first came into being, it was only used for computation and
calculation. Only the big organisations and the government could afford
computers. However, with the development of technology, computers have
become easily available and people have started using them for their personal
purposes. Since computers have become more sophisticated with processors,
huge storage, and considerable memory, they can be used not only for writing or
calculation, but also for entertainment. Perhaps, people use computers mostly
for their entertainment. Composing a song, making a movie. and editing a
photograph - all can be done on computers. Because of the development of ICT,
changes have come lo the media and forms of entertainment. Since songs can be
digitised and converted into MP3 format. they can be played on computers.
Similarly, we can watch videos and movies on computers. A huge volume of
data can be stored on CD or DVD. Watching movies on DVD players without
going to the cinema hall is a very common practice nowadays. Internet with
faster speed has become easily available due to 'fibre optic network. As a result,
people do not have to depend on audio CD or DVD either for listening to music
or watching films. On top of it, programmes in different radio and television
channels can be direcily accessed through the Internet. Sometimes recorded
programmes are also available on the Internet. Hence, viewers can access these
programmes according to their convenience.
New forms of entertainment have appeared with the development of ICT.
Computer games are one of them. Big industries of computer games have been
in established all over the world and the experts of these industries are innovating
& computer games of various sorts. The extensive popularity of computer games


--- Page 19 ---
14 Information and Communication Technology
demonstrates its immense success as a new medium of entertainment. One of the
reasons for their success is that computer games entertain people of all ages with
different preferences. These games can be played with others, the computer
itself, or even with gamers in a remote place via networl. In fact, it should be
noted here that excessive and compulsive use of computer or video games may
become so swong that it can easily tum into an addiction. That is why
people around the world are warmed about the negative consequences of
compulsive computer or video gaming, Development in ICT played a vital role
in the emergence of new forms of entertainment. Once, making animation or
cartoon films was very difficult. It has become easier for ICT and high-end/
super computers. Not only that, innovations done by creative designers have
brought about changes to graphic works. Digital actors and actresses have been
created on computers for graphic movies that are no longer dependent on real
actors and actresses. Use of high-end! super computers in creating imaginary
dinosaurs and aliens for popular commercially successful films is very
common nowadays.
In summary, ICT has not only created new forms of entertainment, but also
made them accessible to the mass. Most importantly, [CT has revolutionised
the entertainment industry and its ultimate future in the entertainment industry
is beyond one’s imagination.
Bangladesh has started developing information and communication technology
late in comparison with other countries. That is why Bangladesh is significantly
lagging behind. Even though the significance of ICT was not realised, nowadays
ICT is getting proper importance. We are getting high speed internet connection
as we are connected to the submarine cable.
There is a positive side of the extension of technology. Il a nation lags behind at
a moment in any particular technology. it does not mean it will stumble all the
time. It may leapfrog other countries. Bangladesh is trying her level best to be
equal with other countries in her use of techmology.
In the 2024 edition of the ICT Development Index (IDI) formulated by the Internation-
al Telecommunication Union (ITU), Bangladesh scored 62 out of 100. This score is
Jower than the average for lower-middle-income countries (64.8) and significantly
below the average for countries in the Asia-Pacific region (77.3). In this index, Myan-
mar, Sri Lanka, Maldives, Vietnam, and Bhutan ranked higher than Bangladesh, while
Pakistan is ranked just below Bangladesh. -
2
Bi


--- Page 20 ---
Information and Communication Technology and Our Bangladesh 15
Through e-Governance, transparency in all government activities can be ensured. The
E-Government Development Index (EGDI) is used to present the state of e-government
development among the UN member states. Factors such as internet access infrastrue-
ture, online services, telecommunications connectivily, and people's capacity to use
ICT are considered. In the 2024 index. Bangladesh ranked 100th out of 193 countries.
In this regard, Bangladesh still has a long way to go in improving its use of [CT.
The infrastructure for information technology has started to be constructed in the
country by the present govemment. Setting up the fibre optic connection
throughout the country, an initiative is taken to provide the internet service to
remote area. The number of telephone users was negligible in the country just
ago one and half decades, but now every adult uses a phone. Information service
centres have been opened at the union level, the post offices of the remote areas
are transformed into e-centres that provide the service of mobile money
transaction. The district information cell and the national information cell with
the union information centres are important additions to the infrastructure of the
country. The tasks like registration of admission test. getting the result of public
examination, and purchasing train tickets are bemg done regularly on the mobile
phone. ICT courses are included in the curriculum of schools and colleges. This
textbook is an example of that. Computer Science is being taught in the colleges
and universities. The younger generation of the country is joining the software
companies along with setting their own firms. and a large number of young
people are strengthening the economy of the country through outsourcing.
12 May, 2018 is a very important day for us. In this day, Bangladesh, as 57
state of the world, has launched its own satellite ‘Bangabandhu-1" in the space.
As a result we have moved one step ahead to digital Bangladesh. Bangladesh
will be benefited in the field of Education. Health, Agriculture, weather forecast
and economic advancement by using this satellite. This will be used in satellite
based television services as well as ensuring our National Security. For this
satellite it will be easy to spread internet and telecommunication facilities in the
remote areas of the country. By using Bangabandhu-1 Satellite, we will be able
to save and earn foreign currency in the Information and telecommunication
sector.
Activi

Design a poster about what to do for building up Digital Bangladesh’,

al


--- Page 21 ---
le Infermation and Communication Technalogy
Exercise
1. In which year was London Science Museum successful in making the
engine capable of calculating mechanically?
A. 1833 B. 1842
C. 1953 D. 1991
2. Which scientist made it possible for us to do office from home?
A. Charles Babbage B. Ada Lovelace
C. James Clerk Maxwell D. Jagodish Chandra Bose
3. Who is the inventor of Facebook?
A. Steve Jobs B. Bill Gates
C. Mark Zuckerberg D. Tim Berers Lee
4. Because of the use of ICT in government services —
i. government services can be easily accessed within the shortest
possible time;
ii. the standard of government services can be enhanced;
iil. government service can be availed even in holidays;
Which one is correct?
Ao d&i B. i& iii
C. di &iil D. i, ii & iii
Read the section below, and answer questions 5 & 6:
Shumon fell sick while on a pleasure trip at St. Martin. When he contacted a
doctor in Dhaka, he advised him to get himself admitted soon in a hospital. The
doctor of the nearby hospital arranged his necessary treatment after consulting
with a medical specialist in Dhaka.
5. The technology through which the local doctor can get advice of a specialist
doctor is
i. tele-medicine
ii. E-healthcare
iii. E-commerce a
=]
ES


--- Page 22 ---
Information and Communication Technology and Our Bangladesh 17
Which one is correct?
A 1&ii B. 1 &iii
C. ii & iii D. 1,11 &ifi
6. Which technology played a vital role for the treatment of Sumon?
A ICT B. Television
C. Robot D. Computer
7. Milon of Jadurchar, Roumari of Kurigram intends to obtain higher education
staying at home. How can ICT help him?
8. What possibilities have been created by ICT for solving unemployment
problem in Bangladesh? Explain.
g
I)
a
Forma-3. [CT-(9-10)


--- Page 23 ---
Second Chapter
Computer Maintenance and Cyber Security
Tae loan TIER eee Ge a
earn [Username | wa)
gr ET BL .
Ben Ca)
hails ps Ae es pu
, © © we | :
re -
After completing this chapter, we will be able to —
» explain the importance of computer maintenance;
» differentiate between software uninstallation and software deletion:
# explainthe cyber risks and information security;
3 explain the impact of cyber crime on people's lives and what to do if’
a victim of a cyber attack;
» explain the difference between general and social sites;
» analyse the consequence of the excessive use of the internet;
# explain the negative aspects of playing games excessively;
%» describe the event of software piracy.
# explain the importance of copyright law:
# explain the necessity of security with reference fo the free flow of
information in the internet;
# expain the importance of troubleshooting in computers;
# install and uninstall software following the right process;
» prepare a unique password;
% troubleshoot the usual problems of the computer.


--- Page 24 ---
Information and Communication Technology 19
Computer Maintenance
A computer combines various electronic components (hardware) and software.
Therefore, to ensure optimal performance, it must be properly maintained. The
computer must be protected [rom external factors such as humidity, temperature,
electrical fields, magnetic fields, dust, smoke, water, etc. Additionally, the operat-
ing system and application software must be kept up to date. Thus, computer
maintenance refers to the efforts to keep the computer in good working condition.
There are two types of computer maintenance:
1. Preventive Maintenance: Preventive maintenance refers to taking precaution-
ary measures before a fault or issue arises in the computer. Users can perform
this type of maintenance, such as virus scanning, disk cleaning, disk delragmen-
tation, software updates, etc.
2 Corrective Maintenance: Corrective maintenance refers to repairing or replac-
ing components after a fault or issue has occurred in the computer to make it
operational again. Corrective maintenance usually requires the help of a com-
puter technician.
One more important thing to note is that no metallic or magnetic objects should
be kept near the computer. Additionally, to protect against electric shocks, the
computer's power connection should have proper grounding.
Importance of Software in the Maitenance of Computer
Story 1: Raina was very intent on having a laptop [rom her father after getting
admission to the college. As her attainment in the first term examination was
good, her father bought her a branded laptop with core i5 processor. Raina was
impressed with the quality and speed of the laptop. She installed many pieces of
software within a few days. However, she noticed a gradual decline in its
performance. After one year, she observed that the laptop was running too slow
and it was irksome working on the computer. After some days, she made a
capricious demand to her father for purchasing another one for her.
Story 2: Ankon has recently taken internet connection for the computer. Now he
frequently browses the Web and has benefitted greatly from the sites with the
§ information related to his study. Besides education. he uses the internet for


--- Page 25 ---
20 Computer Maintenance and Cyber Security
sending emails, listening to music, and watching movie. Recently he has found
the computer often restarting without any prior notification. In addition, the
internet browser opens different sites without any command. One day, he
inserted a memory stick into the USB connection port on his computer. He was
shocked to find out that his files turned into 'shortcuts'. He could not even locate
the original files.
‘What do you understand from the above events? Is it similar to your experience?
You have already known many things about Information and Communication
Technology this time. and you have understood that the processor and software
are the main components in ICT. A new computer, be it a desktop, laptop or
tablet, usually runs fast, but afler some days, it gradually slows down. As it gets
old, it becomes slow. Sometimes, you have to wait for a long time after giving a
command. Sometimes the situation is so bad that vou want to buy a new one.
‘What is the way to resolve this situation? Here lies the importance of computer
maintenance. You have to learn a little about computer maintenance in the junior
classes. Most of the people do not like the task of maintaining ICT or
technological devices. Tlowever, it is an important task. If yon want to keep your
ICT device operative, you have to maintain it. You need not to be an expert for
that job. We are talking about software-oriented maintenance of ICT devices.
If the Windows Operating System of Microsoft Company is used in your 1CT
device (in almost all the computers of the world, Windows Operating System is
used), you have to check its status and update the operating system all the time.
If the device is connected to the internet, the updates are done automatically.
Other operating systems provide a similar kind of facilities too. In spite of that,
you have to use registry clean up software to keep the machine fast. If you do not
use this software, your machine will not work properly and it will be a matter of
annoyance for you.
Besides, whenever the computer is used, some temporary files are created. If
these files are not erased for a long time, they occupy a lot of space in the hard
disk and slow down the speed of the computer. That is why we should erase the
temporary files with a software. It will make some space fiee and speed up the
computer.

g

=


--- Page 26 ---
Information and Communication Technology 21
Nowadays, the use of ICT device can not be imagined without the internet
connection. Many cookies and temporary internet files are saved in the cash
memory of the internet browser when you surf the net. It slows down the
computer. If it is not possible to clean up the cash memory everyday, it must be
done in every few days’ intervals. A piece of software can help you to get the
job done.
Using ICT device without anti-virus, anti-spyware and anti-malware is very
risky. It is an important maintenance activity that protects the users' device from
the attack of virus, malware and spyware, and they can safely use their devices.
Now many anti-virus, anti-malware, and anti-spyware software can be
downloaded free of cost from the internet and used to protect the computer. Even
these pieces of software can be updated from the internet.
The computer users can run disk clean ups and disk defragmentors © keep the
usual speed of the computer. These programmes are attached with the
operating system. These two pieces of software clean up the space of hardware
and arrange the files in such an order so that the speed of the computer is kept
up.
Installation and Uninstallation of Software
We know that the ICT devices are operated with software. These pieces of
software have to be installed in the computer or in other devices. When we
purchase any ICT device, the seller asks us about the software that we require.
After installing the required pieces of software along with operating software, he
gives it to us. In this way, we can use ICT devices, for example, computer, tablet,
smartphone, etc., as we require.
The process of installing operating system software is complex, and expertise
is essential for this task. In addition to the operating system software, we need
different types of software. These pieces of software should be installed on the
basis of our needs.
Installation of any software requires special attention to the issues given below:
¥ Whether the hardware of your device supports the pieces of software to be
installed;
& » Whether there is anything important in 'read me' file; if any, read it;
ES


--- Page 27 ---
22 Computer Maintenance and Cyber Security
# Whether all other works are stopped during the installation; if not, the
mstallation process often gets hampered;
» Whether the anti-virus software is turned off, and
# Whether the administrator of the operating system has the permission or not
(Almost all the devices have the permission except some particular ones).

Installation of software, except the operating system one, depends almost on the
operating system itsell. However, the process of installation is almost the same.
We need the soft or the digital copy of the piece of software to install it. It can.
be installed from CD. DVD, pendrive, or the Internet. In most of the cases, a
programme called ‘Auto Run” is attached with the software. When you insert a
CD and DVD or connect a pendrive to the USB port, the ‘Auto run’ programme
becomes activated and the piece of software seeks permission to set up. Follow
the next steps aller giving the permission and the piece of software will be
installed in your computer. After restarting the device, you will be able to use the
programme.

Uninstallation of Software

Suppose that you do not need to vse the software anymore. What will you do
then? Most of the users keep the software in the hard disk, However, it occupies
a space and erates problem to run the ICT device smoothly. Therefore, it is wise
to uninstall unnecessary software.
How will we uninstall the software? The Operating System Software helps us 10
get the task done. The nature of all kinds of Operating System Software is almost
same. However, it is easier to uninstall software from a device ran by the android
operating system, especially in the touch-screen smartphones. Select the
application from the settings and touch the particular software. A menu will be
viewed on the screen. Click the space where uninstall is written and the piece of
software will be uninstalled.

“
8


--- Page 28 ---
Information and Communication Technology 23
The following steps should be followed to uninstall a software from a computer
or an ICT device run by Microsoft Windows Operating System.
em mS Sn
—— — og en RT
[CE i ire Bray
. sgserrae wi Frrcrmaseen
Ej 5 [nl] Le
Ce — of mint cm mtn
er — pip
wey aml ==
€ BE ". -y
Click the start button and go to the Control Panel. Then double-click the 'Add or
Remove! or point to uninstall a programme.
An Uninstall or change a program
Gow tal dite Te ita progenies th are she cick Liat, Chamgre oe Reps,
I Tum Which: farms enor
; RO ==
Flare Pusinkar
[Tp —— J
Wl adsbe Photoshop ghtreom 5 Adobe
Gongs Geopie
Nites Pred Ld
EE eon
Hwa 7 Upamie Ts Once
 faelngion Dewinlzad version 33.18.1058 ON DVideosaft Lid.
| Adsbe Fesder 3.53 Agobe Systems inarperated
£5 Micresan Grice 2091 We Compenanty Mcrotom Coperatien
Click Uninstall of the programme that you want to remove, and uninstallation
will start instantly. If the bulk of the file is large, it may take longer. Usually the
computer needs to be restarted after the uninstallation of software. Be careful
before uninstalling any software; or else, uninstallation of a programme may
make it impossible to run the computer without its reinstallation, Therefore. you
must be careful.
Activity )
5 Following the steps, uninstall a piece of software suggested by
3


--- Page 29 ---
24 Computer Maintenance and Cyber Security
Deletion of Software
‘We know that deleting means erasing something. In fact, by uninstalling a piece
of software, we delete it from our JCT device, What will we do with delete’
command then? A software once installed in the JCT device cannot be
uninstalled completely, unless it is deleted by following the recommended
process, Or else it creates problems. Some parts of the uninstalled programmes
are dumped in Lhe Registry file of the operating system. However, it is possible
to delete any programme following the steps shown below. We should also be
careful in doing the task.
The steps to be followed to delete.
At first, uninstall the piece of software as per the previous instructions, and
follow the next steps:
=r —
= J bgt re rea
| Open: | regedit - I
I
[cr
1. Pressing BE +1, activate Run command. Write regedit’, and press enter.
2. Enter the file. menu.
3 Click Export
Free (ET —
a 18 = Import... ; Il
~E Qe | 3
= It CHINE Load Hive
vl HKEY_USERS Unload Hive
4 HKEY_CURRENT CY ||
Connect Network Registry... “
Duscanmect Network Frgantzy |g


--- Page 30 ---
Information and Communication Technology 25
4. The drive that contains the operating software, that is C. should be selected.
i BETTE
Grog a —- = @
pi 2 )
eR]
-
Ty — Fe —
5. Save the file. Tt is very important, Tf any error is made, the system may be
repaired.
Jil or iy =]
Sevan (8 Comptes  @7 me |
Hore! Doh Dems (1 -
i [
Sr <>» <P &
- PRIMARY OF VDOX (D3 DATA IG
Beitop <
= [ETSY SR — -
a | ovomw
Computer Drive iF
@
Marans —
i === L_
ad I
Expt meg
6. Enter ‘Edit’ then.
IF Qistry 31 af ese tin ry rl ... <
[ - [Fie [ESE] ew Freres bi 2
View Favorites | 0 Ne 7
| + (® Com] 1 P—
: : ail & | ove ou
En Th (=
© 4. HKEY USERS || Da
“Ji HKEY_CURRENT_CONFID [—S Cur.
| Find fi
7. Point to "Find. 2
=
Forma, ICT-(9-10)


--- Page 31 ---
26 Computer Maintenance and Cyber Security
8. Find out the name of the software to be deleted, for example, ADUIALS.
9. Click Find Next .
fi == __ =. Fira a L
| —_— | | him BRE |
Loam [Camel Loma Caen |
Pen | tes 9 Eel
= NAS EP C
10. Select in this way.
11. Pressing the right button of the mouse, click the ‘Delete’ option.
(Cea aaa |
| fn Gar me mari sp | — — .
iz C—O
+ Modify. 1
$n | ety my Date.
io ~~ @
E | 7g
H 10
in
ds
Fy —
bys
12. Finally press ‘F3" of the keyboard and delete all the files having that name
from the Registry. In this way, the entire process of deleting will be
completed.
Group Activity
Comparing uninstallation and deletion, present it.
Information Security and Cyber Risk
Information has become one of the most valuable resources today. There are two
main fypes of access: open information and confidential information. Open data
is freely accessible to everyone and can be shared without restrictions. Examples
include news, articles, and press releases from organizations or institutions. It is
made [or public use and does not require any complex security. On the other
hand, confidential information is restricted to authorized individuals or organiza-
tions and is protected by legal obligations. For example, commercial contracts,
., national identity cards, passwords, etc. Disclosure of confidential information
§ without permission may result in legal complications or financial compensation.
Forma-4, ICT- 9-10


--- Page 32 ---
27
In the age of the Fourth Industrial Revolution, digital technology has become
essential for sharing personal information to meet various needs. Digital rech-
nology refers to electronic devices, systems, and tools capable of processing,
storing, and transmitting data in binary form, enabling tasks like communica-
tion, accounting, and automation. However, with the widespread adoption of
these technologies, individuals are increasingly exposed to cybercrimes that
jeopardize their information security. The cyber-world is a digital space where
people interact and access information via the internet—a virtual realm built on
data, code, and the web. This parallel world continues 10 expand and evolve,
becoming an integral part of our daily lives.
Cyber Crime
Any action that violates societal norms or the law is considered a crime. When
such actions are carried out online or using the Internet, they are called cyber-
crimes. These crimes involve using computers, digital devices. and the Internet.
and sometimes the devices or networks become targets of cyberattacks. Cyber-
criminals can steal personal information, putting individuals’ safety at risk.
Therefore, everyone must understand how to protect themselves from cyber-
crimes and information security threats in the digital world. Cybercrimes come
in various forms, each posing unique risks to information security. Some exam-
ples of cybercrimes are listed below.
. Hacking
0 Brute Force Attack
* Data Interruption
. DDoS Attack
. Computer Malware etc.
Hacking
Hacking is usually accessing or taking complete control of a website or comput-
er network without permission. The person who hacksis called the hacker.
Hacking can be legal or illegal. Some organizations hire hackers to test the secu-
rity of their systems. The work of these hired hackers is called legitimate hack-
ing. They check system security but do not harm the system.
For example, there are many legitimate hackers to
check the system. They are called white hat hackers.
Those who do illegal hacking are also called Crackers.
Tegal hackers or crackers use the Iniernet and other
networks to steal or destroy data. They usually use -
several techniques to easily find out the vulnerabilities g


--- Page 33 ---
28 Computer Maintenance and Cyber Security
of software systems over the Internet and find passwords. As a result, it can
easily cause damage. They are called black hat hackers. The trend of hacking
crime is increasing day by day. Cybercrime is committed through hacking.
Hackers can view other people's e-mails, gain unauthorized access 10 web serv-
ers, or steal files over a network.
Brute Force Attack
Just as a thief in real life uses different keys to enter a locked room and try to
unlock it, digital criminals use other types of software to illegally access peo-
ple's accounts such as bank, social media, and email accounts, and in many cases
even digital devices. And try to make assumptions about them one by one.
Sometimes. they are successful, and if successful. they steal various personal
information of the person.
_—
[semi]
A [ESS
TT — “Automated Tool Sarva
They use the stolen personal information to commit multiple crimes. This type of
cyber attack is a severe cybercrime. This type of cyber attack is known as a brute
force attack. If is a method in which an attacker systematically tries all possible
combinations of passwords or encryption keys to gain unauthorized access to a
system. It relies on (rial and error, using automated wols to find each option
correctly and keep trying until it succeeds. This can be effective if there are no
security measures such as strong passwords or other measures to prevent this.
Data Interception
Water pumps usually irrigate land for agriculture to the land or fields through
drains or pipes. If someone cuts this drain or pipe midway or leaks the water
pipe, then the amount of water that is supposed to be received will not be avail-
able. As a result. farmers will suffer. A vigilance system should ensure that no
4 one can illegally take water in the middle. Similarly, when exchanging informa-
=


--- Page 34 ---
Information and Communication Technology 20
tion digitally, someone between the receiver and the sender can intercept it. This
process of theft is known as data interception.
service ser
o — Pr
8 | ®
hd
Inodet
End-to-end encryption, commonly used in software or apps, ensures that data
(such as messages, images, videos, voice call records, and documents) cannot
be intercepted or stolen by third parties. Encryption is the process ol encoding
information to prevent unauthorized individuals from reading or understanding
it. As a result, the data becomes unreadable to anyone without proper authoriza-
tion. Confidential information transmitted over public networks is typically
encrypted with a unique code to safeguard its privacy and security.
DDoS Attack - (Distributed Denial of Service)
‘When a person is interviewed on TV, if many people ask the person many ques-
lions at once, it becomes difficult for the person lo speak well on a particular
topic and wastes time. Because he can lose track of what wo say and what to
keep. Similarly, in the digital world, a Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS)
attack uses multiple devices to attack a specific target simultancously.
Autackers
Target Server
Internet =
=F
J 2

In a DDOS attack, multiple computers or devices flood a website or online
service with traffic, slowing it down or causing it to crash. The attack aims to
impersonate the system so genuine users cannot access or use it.

1

g

EB


--- Page 35 ---
30 Computer Maintenance and Cyber Security
Malware
Malware is an abbreviation for English MaliciousSoftware. Malware is software
designed and developed to intentionally harm a mobile. computer. server, web-
site, or computer network. This softwareworks against the interests of the user
of mobile, computer, or any other digital system. However, if a piece of software
unintentionally causes a problem to a computer system due to its incompetence,
it cannot be called malware; This is called a software bug . Malware is a type of
harmful software that is used to disrupt the normal [functioning of a computer,
mobile, or any other digital system, collect confidential information, illegally
intrude into a protected computer network system or display unwanted adver-
tisements. Malware can be of different types. Namely - Computer viruses,
‘Worms, Trojan Horse, Spyware, Ransomware, Adware, Rootkits, Spamming
ete.
Cyber Bullying
Forcing a person to do something through the use of information and communi-
cation technology is called cyberbullying or cyberterrorism. Humiliating some-
one socially, making threats, creating fear, publishing someone's personal infor-
mation or pictures on social media without permission, publishing wrong infor-
mation or spreading rumors about various sensitive issues on social media,
creating chaos in society, or spreading communal hatred. Nothing includes
cyber terrorism.
Mobiles, computers, tablets, devices, social media, websites, messages, e-mails,
ete.. are used for cyber terrorism. A person is socially humiliated, and their
private life is disrupted by embarrassing pictures, videos, and offensive or
insulting comments in e-mail or social media,
Cyber terrorism is more common among children, teenagers and young adults.
As a result of this, their social and family life is affected, as well as feelings of
inferiority, depression, panic, and even suicidal tendencies are created in them.
In most cases, deleting an image, video, or information is very difficult or
impossible after publishing it on social media or a website. Again. in the case of
a fake ID, it becomes very difficult or impossible to find the identity of ils source
or publisher. So we also have to be careful about these things.
Fake News
x Fake news is any false or misleading information presented as news that is inten-
2 tionally spread to deceive people or influence people's opinions. [t can be fabri-


--- Page 36 ---
Information and Communication Technology 31
cated entirely of stories or distorted information and used to mislead the public
or promote a particular agenda through social media. websites, or other chan-
nels.
In this age of overuse of social media, the spread of fake news is happening at
an alarming rate. Fake news spread over the internet has led to many political
and religious conflicts around the world, The news that 'Chile has taken the ear’
should not run after Chile. but first of all should look at the ear. Similarly, any
online post or news should be verified and believed. Various types of false news
or rumors are usually spread using fake names of individuals or organizations.
According to the Information and Technology Act 2006 in Bangladesh, cyber-
bullying and spreading fake news on digital platforms is punishable by impris-
onment of up to 10 years or a fine of up to Tk 1 crore or imprisonment and fine.
LB wert fos ape we ra - me ee
>" aa = TT a -
eh adr PS oe Lore :
Fd ar og 31 Fa A or Me
ut Ea Tec el
5 <p ONUNEGD
ai TT TN = ARR
B® i
-— = ‘5 oy » #
The following tasks can be done if anyone becomes a victim ol a Cyber Attack.
For example:
1. Contact National Helpline 109, National Emergency Service 999 or ICT
2. Helpline as soon as possible.
3, Assistance can be sought from someone proficient in technology.
Complaints ean be [iled on the website of the www.rab.gov.bd.
4. It should be shared with parents or the members of the family.
5. The digital devices need to be turned off.
6. A written complaint should be submitted to the Bangladesh Telecommuni-
cation Regulatory Comission (BTRC)
7. This issue should not be shared with strangers or discolsed publicly.
8. A general diary should filed to the neares Police branch.
9. Concusmer's rights need to be practised. -
10. Evidence of the crime should be collected. g


--- Page 37 ---
32 Computer Maintenance and Cyber Security
Il we fall vietim to such incidents, we will not keep it to ourselves but inform our
parents and even teachers and we will quickly make a General Diary (GD) at the
nearest police station. In our country now GD or general diary can be done
online. For this, we must search by typing: hitps://gd.police gov.bd in the address
bar of any internet browser.
Mobile application software (apps) for almost all units of law enforcement agen-
cies such as Rapid Action Battalion (RAB). Counter Terrorism Unit (CTU),
Criminal Investigation Department (CID), and Metropolitan Police such as
Jawadhaar Jai, Oibhashad Inadhaar. etc. Playstore By downloading from and
keeping it on your mobile phone, you can use it to fight crime even in times of
danger. Suppose someone has suffered an accident in the cyber world. In that
case, they should send a GD to the nearest police station along with a copy of the
GD and the following information along with the information about the crime in
the application of Jabrat Jai or contact the cybercrime helpdesk of the nearest
police station with a copy of the GD.
The Strategies for Security over the Internet
The following security strategies can be used for sale Internet use and to protect
personal information and devices from online threats. namely-
= Enable Two Factor Authentication (2FA).
* Using strong passwords and not using the same password across all digital
platforms.
= Updating computer software and mobile application software (general)
regularly.
= Refrain from sharing private or confidential information on social media.
» Not to share personal confidential information (pin code or password) with
anyone.
= Installing antivirus and firewall protection on the device.
Two Factor Authentication (2FA)
Two-factor authentication means that when we log in with the ID and password
to access our e-mail, social media, or other online accounts, an OTP (One Time
Password, which is six digits long) comes to our phone or mail. We can access
the account only when we give that OTP correctly; otherwise, we cannot.Ttems
shipped for a limited time. Once used, the token expires and the same token
cannot be used again. Having enabled two-factor authentication makes it very
8 difficult for cybercriminals to hack an account.


--- Page 38 ---
Information and Communication Technology 33
Nowadays, social media is very common. We use social media for various purpos-
es and entertainment. However, we must be very careful about what personal
information we share on social media and what we don't. Hackers can steal our
money through social engineering through various content uploaded on our social
media. We have to be aware of this.

In the practical class, the teacher will show the students the steps to imple-
ment Two Factor Authentication (2FA).

Internet Addiction Disorder (IAD)

The word ‘addiction’ has negative “

connotations and it is usually used with

reference to drugs. It destroys life because it

is tough to come out of the web of drugs. »

Perhaps you are confused thinking that how 7 3

an alarming and negative word ‘addiction’ J

can be associated with ICT and mentioned in ~~ : /] y Fy
an ICT textbook. Some of you who have |
computers may have crossed the limit while =

playing computer games. A few of you did

not leave the computer even though you

should have for an important task. The users who have the internet access have
Facebook accounts too. When you post status on the Facebook, you eagerly wait
for a long time to see whether somebody gives a 'Like' to your status. You feel
pleasure when the number of your Facebook frends increases. Perhaps you may
have spent more time on Facebook than usual. You might have done better in the
examination if you had spent less time on this social network. You could have
read some good books or played a bit more outside in the playground or spent
mote time with your family members.

Perhaps you, who have been damaging your lives by wasting your time on
Facebook or by playing computer games more than you should understand the
cause of adding a negative word ‘addiction’ with the positive words ‘Computer’
and the ‘Internet’. “Addiction” means when someone. in spite of knowing it is a
freakish act, cannot resist the temptation of doing it. What is true for drugs is true
for the computer and Internet too. As drugs are harmful for life, so are the |
computer and the internet if they are used beyond the limit. 8
Forma-5, ICT-{9-10)


--- Page 39 ---
34 Computer Maintenance and Cyber Security

Addiction to Computer Games

An addiction to computer games begins from the

childhood, and it usually happens due to the

ignorance of parents. A computer is a tool and le

different types of work can be done with it. As EF

many positive words are said of this technology, ICY ¢

parents think that what is done through a computer = Beer)

is positive. Therefore, when they see (heir children pS

sitting at the computer for a long time, they do not

think of being alert. Computer games are a kind of

entertainment, and it has a different dimension. If you play computer games

merely as entertainment while staying within the limit. that can be a part of good

entertainment. However this does not happen most of the time. People across

age, children to adults, may be addicted to computer game. A Korean man died

while playing a computer game for 50 hours at a stretch. A Chinese couple sold

their child to pay for their computer games. These examples remind us that an

addiction to computer games is not unusual, If caution is not taken, one can

easily be addicted to computer game.

As addiction to computer games is new, extensive research has not been done on

it. In future, it will provide us with absolute direction. Research has identified

the presence of a stimulating chemical in a gamer's brain, addicted to computer

games. The shape of a brain is altered im those who use a computer 10 hours at a

stretch 6 days a week,

Therefore, we should keep in mind that computer games could be a good

entertainment, but it is very easy to get addicted to it, and the effect of it is

certainly damaging.

Addiction to Social Networking Site

Man is a social being. They continued a social relationship all the time.

However, the nature of social communication nowadays is distinctly different

from the one in past. It means a different social networking based on the internet.

There are some social networking sites such as Facebook, twitter, instagram,

LinkedIn. Tiktok, Likee etc. through which people can communicate with their

circle. Once, these sites were only for the young people. but now people of all
.. agesuse it. They use it not for communicating with others, but also for establishing
2 ideologies and legitimising their opinions. If it was within the periphery of


--- Page 40 ---
Information and Communication Technology 35
objectives, it would not have created any problems, but it is a matter of regret
that addiction to social networking sites has becomes a problem for the whole
world.
The psychiatrists have started doing research on this matter, and the findings
show that the success of the sites depends on how skillfully they can attract the
users. The main factor is how often users visit the site and how long they remain
on the site. The more the site is visited, the more successful the site is and
consequently, the more money the site will earn. Therefore, if the users are not
careful, there is every possibility of developing addiction to these sites.
Another interesting [actor was identified by the psychiatrists. Individuals have
an inherent desire to impress and admire their own self. In psychology, this is
defined as ‘narcissism’. The social networking sites instigate this inherent human
desire. A competitive attitude develops within everyone to make themselves
popular. The users upload minute information about themselves, and when
people watch and like it. they become happy. The entire system works like a
drug, and users waste their ime for hours. In fact, a major waste of time
world-wide is caused by the immense popularity of social networking sites.
The Way out of Addiction
We have already learned in the previous section that a man can be addicted to
computer games and social networking sites just as he can be addicted to drugs.
Therefore. both drug and computer game or social networking site addicts
display a similar kind of signs and symptoms. It is wise to be careful than to try
to get rid of the addiction. There is an apprehension that the users who do not
know anything about the addiction may develop a tendency to it. Since you have
read about it in the textbook, you may remain more careful about it.
People may become too preoccupied with it, as they do with other sources of
entertainment. However, playing computer games does not increase our
knowledge on technology. You will just have the enjoyment of playing the
computer games, not any technological knowledge. You should be careful about
playing computer games. so that it may not affect the important works of your
daily life.

8

[51


--- Page 41 ---
36 Computer Maintenance and Cyber Security
We hope that you will not be addicted to 3
computer games. Similiarly you will prevent 5 af
the people around you from being computer §¢ 2 {
game-addicts. Those ~~ who become a= z \
game-addicts show some particular J ‘
symptoms. They always think about a [4 * ~
particular game, and when they start playing A | i
the game, they become excited, and they can | Re,
not do their daily jobs smoothly. They become "= Hii ie J ie
inattentive in their studies. When they are v Eo
forced to keep themselves alool from playing
games, they feel discomfort. The point of worry is that the addiction may come
back even after they become free from this bad habit. The people, who somehow
have developed addiction to computer games and want to get rid of it, have to
acknowledge themselves the fact that they have developed an addiction. They
have to make a list of the important events of their life. They should convince
themselves about the place of computer game on the list. They have to make a
list of the problems of their life too, and they should identify the problems
caused by playing computer games. They should divide and allocate their time
to cover all the important aspects of life-study, homework, playground,
extra-curricular activities, spending time with the family, and voluntary social
works. If they get spare time after doing all of these works, they will play
computer games. They should gradually keep themselves busy with creative
activities rather than computer games.
The users who have been addicted to social networking sites should proceed in
the same way to get rid of the addiction. They should fry to convince themselves
that wasting time on these websites is a kind of addiction. When you have an
intention of watching something on social networking sites, you should ask
yourself whether you have really any purpose of watching it. If not, you have
to control yourself. You should note down the duration of time you spend every
time on the sites. After summing up the time you spend on it in a day, week,
and month, you should come to a conclusion about the volume of work you
could have done during this time.

g


--- Page 42 ---
Information and Communication Technology 37
You have to reduce the number of unknown friends from your social networking
site to reduce your addiction. You have to convince yourself that you can surf the
sites after completing the important jobs. You have lo develop the habit of
deactivating social networking sites when you have exams or other important
events. You will gradually reduce the addiction in this way, and finaly get rid of
it completely.

You should remember that every moment of your life is valuable, and it is
unwise to spend these moments for any addiction.

Piracy
The objective of copyright law is to provide the writers, artists, and others with
the exclusive right to their creative work. Usually it is expensive and difficult to
reprint any book by violating the copyright law, but now it is easy to make
‘copy’ or ‘facsimile’ using computer technology. It is not required to be an
expert for doing the job. Therefore additional measures are taken to protect the
copyright of computer software, graphics, and animation. When the legal right
is violated, they are deprived of their copyright. It is usually called ‘Piracy’ or
‘Software Piracy’.

The concerned entrepreneurs, writers or programmers can preserve the right to
their intellectual property within the purview of copyright law. That is why it is
illegal either to copy or create something new by editing the software without
the consent of the copyright holders. Therefore, the copy or the new creation has
no legal protection. Even though it is easy to pirate computer software, the
malpractice is not very frequent in the world. The renowned software companies
have formed an agency named ‘Business Software Alliance” (BSA) to preserve
their copyright and to monitor piracy worldwide. The statement given by the
agency in 2011 shows that 7 out of 10 computer users are free from piracy. As
software piracy is an easy task, it is difficult to get the right statistics. Software
piracy is strictly prohibited in Bangladesh.

The Urgency of Copyright Law

The copyright law ensures the right or ownership of the creators to his works for

a certain time. If the creation has any commercial value. the creator should get

it. As poets, litterateur, movie producers, software writers, web designers all
require money and web designers earn their living from creative work, they in
invest labour, intellect, and money in it. They invest money for their labour and 2


--- Page 43 ---
38 Computer Maintenance and Cyber Security
merit of creative works. Therefore, they should have the right to get their money
back either by selling or exchanging the products. The legal right within the
purview of copyright law has given them the advantages. Artists or
programmers get disappointed if they fail to gain any financial benefits for their
creative or intellectual properties. The implementation of copyright law will
save the creative workers from being deprived.
Right to Information and Security
The law of Right to Information’ is enacted and implemented in different
countries of the world to ensure the free flow of information and people's right
to have information. the Freedom of thought, conscience, speech’ right to obtain
information has been assented as the fundamental right of the citizens in the
constitution of the People's Republic of Bangladesh. As all powers in the
Republic belong to the people, a law called Right to Information Act-2009" has
been enacted to ensure the right of having information. Every citizen has the
right to get information from any authority whenever it is sought under the act,
and the concerned authority is compelled to provide the information if asked. If
people's right to information is ensured through this act, the transperancy and
accountability of the government. autonomous, statutory organizations, and
NGOs funded by the government and foreign organisations will be increased,
corruption will be reduced, and good governance will be established. The right
to information has been ensured under the Act and directives have been given to
the organisations to preserve information.
The Act has ensured access to important information of the state. The
accessibility of government-held information is an important part of
government transparency and accountability to its citizens and good
governance. However, seeking and receiving information that may jeopardise
the security of the state is not permissible in the Act. For example, the Act
does not allow access to questions before the public examinations because the
exam processes will become controversial. The secrecy of question papers 18
secured through ‘Right to Information Act’. If technical, technological, or
scientific information is leaked out. the organisations stand to lose financially. In
this context, keeping the information secret is not the violation of the rule, The
most important factor is that any information that may pose a threat to the
g ey unity and sovereignty of the state is not obligatory to reveal under this


--- Page 44 ---
Information and Communication Technology 39
General Troubleshooting
It is unusual that electronic devices have not gone out of order or not created
troubles during using. Some problems are very usual, and some are unusual and
complicated. Usual problems can be fixed by the users, but they have to take the
help of experienced people for complicated problems. Computers or ICT
devices are not exceptions. Those who use electronic devices have noticed that
an operating manual is given with every device. The manual contains a section
on the last two or three pages. entitled, trouble shooting’.
Troubleshooting is the process of finding out the source of troubles. Usually
some questions are given with solutions. The users, according to the nature of
problems, solve them following the solutions.
In fact, trouble-shooting is a systematic process of identifying the source of
problem in the ICT devices in order to solve it. In the manual, usually some
possible problems and solutions in relation to the ICT device are mentioned.
The users. following the basic trouble-shooting steps given in the manual. can
usually resolve the problem in most of the cases. Usually the word
'Troubleshooting' is used for hardware related problems. Some
troubleshootings are discussed in the next page
— ~
_s I 2
ar =, = 38
Ne lr
~ or. he a A
- a <8 (AT ~ .
= x " et . FL.
ay - = fr
¢ “
- 7S pr we,
Po
2
&


--- Page 45 ---
40 Computer Maintenance and Cyber Security
Some Common Desktop Computer Problems and Solutions
Sl nos. Problems General Solutions
1. Computerisnot | 1. Check the main power cable whether the
h connection is loose or not.
starting up. 2. Check whether there is power on the main power-board.
3. If there is no power on the main power-board,
change the main power supply unit.
4. Take the device to the local service centre and
consult an expert.
5. | Nothingis 1 Check if the monitor light is on. Tf the light is on, check the
: viewed on the monitor data cable and plug it properly if the cable is open o
monitor loose.
though the 2. Turn off the system and unplug the power cable
Syetemis from tha main system.
. 3. Remove the RAM from the slots.
running. 4. Clean up the connectors of the RAM rubbing
with an eraser.
5. Clean up the slot of the RAM with a hard brush.
6 Turn on the computer without installing the RAM,
and notice whether you get any beep sound.
7. If you get any beep sound, turn off the computer,
and again turn on after installing the RAM.
8. If you getany beep sound, you have to understand
that the RAM is faulty.
9. Install a new RAM if there is no display yet.
1p. Install the RAM, and check again. Faulty RAM is the
| reason for at least half of the display problems.
3. The system 1. Open the Casing.
becomesvery |2. Remove the CPU or processor fan from the
heated, and motherboard, but don't remove the processor.
abruptly shuts | 3. Perhaps the heat sink is filled with dust that creates
down. copled@bstruction on the free flow of air. As a result, CPU
can not be
4, Clean up the heat sink and fan, and install again.
Now, after closing the cabinet, turn on the computer
again.
5. Ifthe problem is not solved, take the computerto a
Fs) service centre, and talk to an experienced
5 mechanic,


--- Page 46 ---
Information and Communication Technology 41
4. The computer | 1. Check the mother board carefully and find out if
shuts shown on there is any leaking or faulty capacitor has got
its own at every loosened. Tighten the capacitor and the problem will
few minutes, be resolved.

biti [= fot 2. Notice very carefully as the computer is running
heated. whether any IC or any other component producing
extra heat. Be cautious. Let not the board be shorted.

If it happens, go to the nearest service centre.

5; The device 1. Check whether there is any virus in the hard disk by
freezes running an upgraded anti-virus.
while 2. Taking the back up of important data from the disk,
running the format € drive, and remstall Windows. Tt should

Windows.
be done by an expert.

6. Display freezes |1. 1st Step: Turning off the power button and
when the opening the caching, carefully remove the
power button is data-cables and power-cables connected to hard
turned on. disk, CD-ROM, and DVD, and after reconnecting

the cables, restart the computer.

2. 2nd Step: Check RAM, processor, power supply
connection separately whether they are faulty or
loosely connected,

3. 3rd Step: Check the motherboard using the
processor, RAM Hard disk and other related
equipments from an active computer. If it is not
active, change the motherboard. Get the job done
by an expert hand or taking the computer to a
service centre,

Note: Sometimes this problem persists when the
keyboard and the mouseport of the motherboard
are loosely connected. Set the connection
properly.

g
Forma-6, ICT-(9-10)


--- Page 47 ---
42 Computer Maintenance and Cyber Security
(Slnos.| Problems | General Solutions

7. | Thecomputer | 1. If the cooling fan set over the CPU does not move
repeatedly or coal the system properly, this promlem occurs.
freezes, and In that case, switch off the power, and opening the
reboots cooling fan, check it out. If the fan is faulty, replace
automatically. it. Besides, check the fan behind the CPU while the

computer is running.

2. Theproblem persists if the computer has any virus.
Clean up every drive of the hard disk by running
an updated anti-virus. Besides, it happens due to
the installation of new hardware or programme. In
that case, uninstall the programme and run the
computer.

8. Setting an 11. If you get electric shock by touching the metal part of
shock when the computer, it is certain that the computer has
you touch the not earthed. Calling a skilled electrician, get the
metal part of a li asrthied
the computer, | Computer properly earthed.

9. | The date of the 1. If the CMOS (Complementary metal-oxide
ip Aen semiconductor) battery of the motherboard loses
all the time or if power, this problem occurs. In that case, set a new
fe gos of CMOS battery on the motherboard.
changed, i is
not proper]
iz) pen |

1 1. Switching off the power, open the caching, and

10. | Shawing oe check the data cable connected tomotherboard and
message oat hard disk drive, and check the connecting point of
Disk failure’ or the power cable from power supply unit to hard
"Hard disk not disk and properly connect it.
found. 2. Set the jumper properly following the jumper

setting diagram on the back of the hard disk.

3. Entering the BIOS, check whether the hard disk is
detected from the options of the BIOS either
manually or automatically. If the problem is not
resolved, connect your hard disk to a sound
computer and check whether it works or not. If the
problem persists, buy a new hard disk and install

=) the programmes you require. Get the job done by
| an expert.


--- Page 48 ---
Information and Communication Technology 43
SInos.| Problems General Solutions

11. | Showing 1. Usually these messages are shown when you install
messages like excess programmes, and work keeping a lot of
‘Out of programmes open.
memory’ or 2. If the computer does not have sufficient memory
‘Not enough for installing excess programmes, this problem
Memory, occurs. Additinal RAM can be installed in the

motherboard to resolve the problems.

12. | The keyboard is | 1+ Shut down the computer, and check whether the
not working. keyboard is properly connected to the port.

2. If itis not properly connected or the connection is
found loose, refix it and turn on the computer
again.

3. Clean up the virus by running an anti-virus software.

4. If the problem is not fixed yet, install a new
keyboard.

13. | The mouse is 1. Check the connecting-cable of the mouse to the
not detecting computer.
anything. 2. Change the port to see whether it works,

3. Connecting a new mouse to the port, check it
again.

4. Entering the BIOS check whether the mouse is
disabled. If so, enable it, and come out of the BIOS.

5. If the problem persists, connect a new mouse to
the computer. The problem will be resolved.

14. | No power is 1. Be surewhether the power button is turned on.
viewedonthe |5 hack the AC power cord connected properly to
iohitar the power outlet behind the monitor.

i
al
]


--- Page 49 ---
44 Computer Maintenance and Cyber Security
[Sinos.| Problems | General Solutions
15. | Thepoweref |1. Check the video cable whether it is properly
the monitor is connected to the computer or not. If the other
viewed on, but point of the video cable is not permanently
there is no connected to the monitor, fix it firm.
display onthe: 5; Adjust the Brightness and Contrast.
monitor.
16. |The printers 1. Check to see if the correct model of printer is
not giving any selected.
printing output. | 2. Check the power cable connected to the printer.
3. Check whether the button of the printer is turned on.
4. Check if the data cable of the printer connected
properly to the computer.
5. Opening the cover of the printer, find out whether
any paper is jammed inside the machine.
6. Check whether the cartridge contains any ink.
Remove the cartridge, and fix again after shaking
it well.
7. If red or yellow blinking light is shown, press the
reset button of the printer.
g. If the problem is not resolved, install the driver
sofware supplied with the printer.
9. Consultan experienced hardware expert.
Group Activity i i
Discuss what other problems a computer may have besides the ones listed
above. Identify some solutions to these problems.
Exercise
1. What happens when you have many temporary files?
A. Computer runs slow. B. Computer runs fast.
C. Antivirus does not work. D. Internet access is denied.
2. Which programme runs fast while installing a piece of Software from CD,
DVD or pendrive?
re A. Setup B. Autorun
8 C. Read me D. Restart


--- Page 50 ---
Information and Communication Technology 45
3. Which one is the resource of the modern world?
A. Information B. Data
C. Computer D. Internet
4. Installation of software requires attention on whether —
i. it supports the hardware or not.
11. the antivirus software is closed or not.
iii. it has the permission of the administrator or not.
Which one is correct?
A i&ii B. i&iii
C. ii & iii D. iii & iii
Read the section below, and answer the question numbers 5 & 6:
Mr. Ekram has been noticing for a few days that his computer restarts after being
shut down at irregular intervals. He remembers that it started happening after he
copied a song from the pendrive of his friend a few days ago.
5. The error responsible for the computer might be?
A. Operating System Software  B. Virus Software
C. Utility Software D. Antivirus Software
6. For this reason, the computer of Mr. Ekram —
1. may show an unexpected message.
il. may increase the size of files.
iii. may show that it has insufficient memory.
Which one is correct?
A i&u B. 1&ii
Cif & ii D. iii & iii
7. One of your friends play computer games frequently. What negative impact
may this have on him? Discuss.
8. 'It is very important to know about the troubleshooting of computer—
Explain the statement with your arguments. 5
al


--- Page 51 ---
Third Chapter
Internet and Introduction of Web
© Fp e 5 ETE
( OE
a Fai? JF \ 50 ss
| pin lcd E=—
= f(T ain :
-_ RR
After completing this chapter, we will be able to—
# explain the concept of digital content;
» explain the significance of the Internet in education:
# identify the fields of using Internet in an academic curriculum;
» explain the importance of ICT in career development;
» make apresentation on a related topic with the help of Internet.
2


--- Page 52 ---
Internet and Introduction of Web 47
Internet

‘We have already learned that the Internet is a global network that connects com-
puters and devices around the world. It is used to enable people or devices to
share information and communicate with each other via wire or wireless. It is
also used to browse websites, send emails or chat with friends. It uses digital
content.

Digital Content

If any content is preserved, expressed or exchanged as digital data, that is digital
content. [Towever, it can be preserved either in a digital or in an analogue
system. Digital contents can be exchanged either as files of the computer or of
the digital system. Written information, images, sounds or videos anything could
be digital contents.

Types of Digital Content

Any information, image, sound or everything expressed through a digital media
is digital content though it can be divided into four major categories:

+ Text or written content;

+ Image;

+ Sound or audio and

+ Video and animation.

Text or written content: The written content is still voluminous in digital
media, It includes all kinds ol written information, such as essays, blogposts,
list of commodities and citizen's charter, prices of commodities, e-paper,
repotts, ete.

Image: All kinds of pictures. photographs. sketches, and computer images such
as illustrations, cartoons, info-graphics, or animated pictures are the contents of
this sort.

Sound or audio: All the contents of sound or audio are included in this
content. Any kind of audio file along with the broadcast on the Internet and
webinar are audio content.

Video and animation: Any kind of video and animation is its content. The
volume of video content is increasing day by day, as nowadays mobile phones
also have the ability to record video. Similarly, the volume of video content in
the Internet is gradually increasing for the video sharing site like youtube.
Besides, direct airplay of some events is very frequent on the Internet. It is
called "Video Streaming’ which is also regarded as a video content. 2


--- Page 53 ---
48 Information and Communication Technology

E-book

E-book or electronic book is the electronic format of the printed book. As it is

published through an electronic medium, sound, animation, etc. can easily be

added to ir. These books can only be read either by using computer or e-book
reader. Kindle of Amazon.com is the most popular of sll e-book readers.

Benefits of Using E-book

I. Information may be accessed instantly by downloading e-books.

2. E-books do not require any library or specific space for storage. They can
easily be saved and stored on a computer or in a reading device.

3. E-books are easily transferrable.

4. Itis easy to find owt information in e-books.

5. As e-books can be purchased through Tnternet, they do not incur any
shipping or packaging costs.

6. E-books are easy to distribute and sell.

7. E-books can be printed out according to individual demand, and hence, they
are financially more viable.

Different types of E-book

Nowadays, different kinds of e-book can be found. Different publication

requires different e-book format. Usually e-books are divided into the following

five categories:

* Exact copy of a printed version: These books are like their printed versions.
They are published in the pdf (portable document format) format. The
complete texts or parts are available on the internet.

+ E-books that are only readable on the internet: These books are usually
published in the HTML. This is called the website of books.

+ E-books like printed version with some additional facilities: In these books,
the readers have the facilities to comment and to know word meaning. Most
of the books are published in (EPUB) format. These books are possible to
read by using a special device, for example, ibooks and kindle reader, but
the kindle and ibook reader have their own compatible format.

= Smart e-book: Audio, video. animation. ete. are included in these books
along with the written part. These books are called smart-e-books. Tts content
is enriched with interactive multimedia features. For example. there are
quizzes, spaces to answer the quizzes. and options to check the answers. 3D

i images are added to these e-books. However, some e-books are formatted in 3
= such a way that they can be accessed with a specific electronic device and I]
= g


--- Page 54 ---
Intemel and Introduction of Web 49
hardware. For example. ibooks created by Apple computers can only be read
with an ipad or mac computer.

= Apps of e-book: The e-book itself is published as an app on the computer or
on the mobile phone. The e-book. like the printed version, is published under
the Copyright Act.

The Internet in Education
We discussed ‘e-learning’ in a previous chapter where we showed how educa-
tion and training can be imparted by using radio, television. CD-ROM, personal
network, and the Internet. In this chapter, we will have discussions especially on
the role of Internet in education.
You are very much familiar with the word ‘Internet’. Many people are using it.
This technology has brought about a significant change to the world, and some
infrastructural facilities and financial solvency are required to use it. Either a
desktop or a laptop computer is necessary to use the Internet. It is expensive and
cannot be afforded by the majority of the population. Nowadays mobile phone
technology has been upgraded and the ‘Smartphone’, which can provide the
internet facilities, is within the reach of most people. However, the smart phone
is not always an effective tool for educational purposes. The screen of the mobile
phone is so small that its use is confined within the limit of viewing and
exchanging information. A recent invention, the tablet-an electronic device
typically smaller than a laptop, but larger than a smartphone, can be used in
education easily. Many companies are designing applications suitable for tablet
to use in education.
We can not avail the internet facilities just by having a desklop, laptop, tablet or
smartphone suitable for internet-use. An iniernet connection is required for that,
but it is not equally available in all the places of the country. The speed is not the
same. Sometimes a slow-speed internet makes its use meaningless. On top of it,
fast and high speed internet service cannot be afforded by the general people of
our country. Therfore, the students should get the internet connection t low cost
to use it in education.

Our students’ access to a laptop or tablet and high speed internet will not ensure

the use of ICT for their education. The main question is what they will use in the

internet. Ts there any content suitable for them? In fact, there is not much content
available on the Internet in the Bangla language. Initiatives have been taken by
the Government, organisations, and individuals for developing content in

Bangla. We expect to get it very soon in the internet.

Many educational contents are now available on the internet. If a student cannot

understand anything while studying, he/she is sure to get any solution by giving =

a search on the internet. If any student wants to learn anything, he/she will find §

Forma-7, [CT-(5-10)


--- Page 55 ---
50 Information and Communication Technology
it on the internet. The technologists of our country have successtully made
cffective search engines.
There are useful websites for mathematics on the Internet in which the answers
of any mathematical problem can be found. There are websites for practical of
scientific experimentations. Expert groups are formed by enthusiastic people,
and when problems are placed before them, they solve it. There are also some
useful sites available on the Internet for teaching Bangla.
A vast world of knowledge is on the Internet. Now we know that internet plays
a vital role in any disastrous situation. Use of internet in education will be
significant in near future.
The Internet and My Academic Subjects
Perhaps you hear that a teacher is like the flame of a light, and in darkness, they
kindle the light of knowledge that illuminates everything and the swudents see
the ways in the light. In other words, the best teachers in the world cannot teach
anything, but they can only help the learners to learn everything themselves.
Similarly, access to good content on the Internet will not always ensure great
leammimg experiences and sound education for students. The Internet only
provides them with the opportunity to open a new world of knowledge. It
depends on the students themselves how much they learn from it. You must have
come across students who waste time on the Internet, either by playing computer
games or by being engaged in social communication sites. By contrast, some
students learn computer programming availing themselves of the opportunity.
You have certainly noticed that all of your textbooks are available on the Inter-
net. In the beginning of the year, you get the textbooks. but if any book is either
lost or damaged for some reasons, you can download it.
You will be pleased to know that some enthusiastic educationalists of our
country have started making oral versions of the textbooks in soft copies. so
that blind students can be benefitted from these oral versions.
NCB publishes all the textbooks and sends it to you free of cost. Besides,
many supporting books are alse written (we are not talking of the guide books
that actually do not contribute to learning). Those who write these textbooks
upload them on the Internet. Students can download these books directly from
the internet without purchasing them from the market. Many writers of the world
Activity
.. [How can the blind people be benefited by using digital content? Write a report
S  |within 1000 words by taking help from the Internet.


--- Page 56 ---
Internet and Introduction of Web 51
have arranged their books to be available on the internet. If you surf the internet,
you will get your favourite books free of cost. However, you should be cautious
about downloading any book preserved online, keeping in consideration the
Copyright Laws.
We know that our students are not satisfied with what they get in the textbooks.
Therefore, they open science, mathematics or literary clubs. Once, students
could participate in the activities of the clubs physically, but now they have
access to the clubs virtually open on the Internet. Now students of the whole
world can participate in the activities of the clubs and increase their academic
competence, Now-a-days olympiad on different subjects are being arranged in
our country. You are increasing the fame of our country by participating in the
olympiad.
Web page
A web page or web in short is a type of document that is suitable for use on the
World Wide Web (World Wide Web-www) and Internet browsers. Therefore, the
file kept on the server of different countries for the use of Internet users is called
‘Web page. Web pages are usually created using HTML (Hyper Text Markup Lan-
guage- HTML). In addition to text or writing, images. graphics, animations, web
pages may contain various types of data files, videos, audios, etc, and links or
hyperlinks to other pages. And various types of program files are required to display
the content of the web page in the browser.
‘Web Site and Web Portal
A website is an allocated space or location of a computer properly connected to the
Internet to store one or more web pages.On the other hand, a web portal is a collec-
fion of links, content, and services within a website that are presented simply to
inform users. Any of the services on the website can be a part of the web portal. For
example: knowing the flight schedule and ticket booking from the web portal of an
airline company.
Product advertising and product buying and selling services on e-commerce web-
sites are also part of the portal. A portal page manages to present information from
an external source. As an example, Bangladesh Government's Bangladesh National
Information Broadcasting’ portal (www.bangladesh.gov.bd) can be mentioned from
where there is a system to get all kinds of necessary information at the government
level of Bangladesh.
io
3


--- Page 57 ---
52 Information and Communication Technology
Web Server and Web Client
A-website has two parts. Namely- webserver and web client. Client software takes
user input and sends data to the server called request. According to the data of the
client. server sends a response. Webserver is a special kind of Hardware or Software
that can provide services to a lot of clients at the same.
Web Server Browser
HTTP RESPONSE
—

For example, all forms of the Bangladesh government are available at forms.gov.bd.
For the convenience of the public, all the necessary forms of the Government of
Bangladesh are stored in a web enabled database which can be accessed by anyone
on the Internet from that address.
Generally, data is accessed from the database of an organization through web brows-
er software and displayed on the customer's computer, Through the use of various
levels of middleware and other software, users can access previously protected data
over the Internet or local area network. For example, a buyer can search online
through a web browser to find out the price of the desired product in the website
created through the web and database of various vendors. A buyer can even access
the seller's website from the comfort of his home through web browser software.
Web Client: On the Internet and World Wide Web, a user or client usually sends a
request for data or information to the web server using HTTP (Hypertext Transfer
Protocol) or HTTPS (Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure) protocol. Client requests
are usually sent through the web browser and the result of the request is received
from the web server which is usually displayed in the web browser itsell. TCP/IP
(Transmission Control Protocol / Internet Protocol) protocol is a type of communi-
cation protocol used on the Internet to send messages .
Downloading: Downloading over a computer network is the process of getting
information from a remote system to a local system. That is, to store any information
from the computer network or the Internet on one's own computer or device, For

5 example: Saving a file from an e-mail or website to your device.

E

3


--- Page 58 ---
Internet and Introduction of Web 53
Upload: Upload is sending data
from local the system to a remote cammunty contank ites.
system using the Internet or the B K-] a
network, For example: If some- = pi
one sends a file by e-mail, it is k §
saved on that e-mail server. & - Oana et Be
Web Browser
The Internet is called the ocean of information, because the Internet makes it possi-
ble to use all the information that is available on all the computers connected to the
network spread across the world. The software that works to display Internet infor-
mation or Web page or World Wide Web-WWW is called Web browser.
‘Web Browsing is visiting interconnected Web pages or WWW hosted on web serv-
ers in different countries of the world. Various information can be brought to the
user's computer by web browsing. There are different types of sofiware for web
browsing. These web browsers usually display the web pages that are stored in the
web server computers connected to the Internet in different parts of the world. In
1990, Tim Barnes Lee created the first web browser called World Wide Web. Note
that the World Wide Web is known as the world's first web browser.
Below are the names of some of the popular web browsers at present. Namely —
E: Internet Explorer (Internet Explorer) or Microsoft Edge
. Mozilla Firefox
. Safari
. Opera
. Chrome Givens. LE —
» Internet Explorer
i Google Chrome ete. i) @

-
Various words used in Web Browsing sofi- kn i Com i
ware are given in the next page -
URL: The complete address of a web site or page is called URL. The full form of
URL is Uniform Resources Locator: For example: http://www .shikha.com: But note
that only www.shiklcha.com or shikkha.com is not called URL. A URL has three §


--- Page 59 ---
54 Information and Communication Technology
parts. namely (1) protocol name, (2) hosimame and (3) Name with location of the
filename. For example-
http://www.google.com/maps
Note that there is only one website with one name in the world.
Home page: The main page of an organization, company or person's web site is
called Home page. It is usually set on the Start page. The web page that is set as the
start page on the web server is the user's homepage. That is. the page that appears as
soon as the web address is typed in the browser is the home page.
Bookmark: Bookmark is a web page list. From where you can directly go to that
web page by selecting the name of a web page.
Reload/Refresh: Reload/Refresh cornmand should be given to know whether there
has been any change in the middle while reading the web page whose data is con-
stantly changing. Reload / Refresh command is very important especially for
dynamic webpages.
Stop: When data is downloaded on a web page and midway it is decided not fo view
that web page, then the download must be stopped by clicking on the Stop button.
JL —
Search
Go

Search: Finding something on the intemet is called Search. There are several search
engimes to facilitate the search. Like- Google, Bing, Yahoo etc.
Search Engine : Search engine is a software tool that finds information from the
world wide web. For example - Google. Yahoo, Bing, MSN, Ant etc.

“

a

3

~i


--- Page 60 ---
Internet and Introduction of Web 55
Exercise
1. Which one is essential to excess a website?
A. Desktop PC B. Tablet PC
C. Smartphone D. The Internet Connection
2. Which one is the constituent part of Information and Communication
Technology?
A. Computer B. Television
C. The Internet D. Smartphone
3. Digital contents are —
i. e-books, Blogposts and e-articles
il. info graphics and Animated Film
iil. audio and Video Streaming
‘Which one is correct?
A 1&ii B. i&iii
C. H&iii D. iii & iii
Read the section below, and answer the questions 4 & 5:
The father of Rini and Rony purchased a Tablet PC for them. Rini and Rony
read in class IX and X respectively.
4. The best use of the Tablet PC for Rimi and Rony will be for -
A. Playing games B. Listening to music
C. Calculation D. Study
5. For the highest use of the Tablet PC. Rimi and Rony will need-
i. a faster internet connection
ii. cheaper internet service
iil. better skills in the English language.
Which one is correct?
A i&il B. i&iii
C. ii &iii D. i, 1i & iit
6. How can ICT be helpful for building up our career? Explain.
7. "Now it is impossible to study without the help of the Internet,’ explain with
your arguments. 5
=


--- Page 61 ---
Fourth Chapter
My Writings and Accounts
an
ER i
= sia = =
ae CGR ee | LR i [J
CP Er Tr TT Ro | 55 Hopi 3-41 43
EY Ey SEE et | - re ~~
————— FAL SI SN WT Sky ATTY TT WO
| wren sm 0 ry ym an sv ren see swe sree | |
Aviaacus over tice wn) 2a on OF] #94, wa Ser 0) Sele ov onlin
‘te mg Se har Sor fers caBong For ee ome Soe, ce | |
ee, ATT wep as Bat ATO CHA 3 res a awoger wae on | |
glia fir “57 ‘a Grr iE Fr Wor smn san on cw ae |
CE A ER 47 | 6 regenera = 7 whe tar | |
TO (A, TR A TCR 4 We TE mw ont wera | | rm CET ETE
7 goer oe ores 4 TR a rt mong rer a | | i 8
iad] efor ws re cea | 8 cw cate ger reed Fry meme vir | = ill ue
OTE Tw a TE Tr ees Pie we | wa ow sens asm se | | A L {=H
TTS TO SY 07 TW TART | Ye ee mage wr per «we iq | |, 7 = I =
Gr E ago am | wa wena 97S men aa pap er Eales, soar ota | | is sell] » ww
1 iS er a 0 Sra we aq wy Sf amefege sen | |, i BN {oo}
1) A iE or oie + rh & OE ea am rs mes wav ov | [| I= oe
Sy ob BT B oll CS
FET GOT a TF SA 50 OT IY SRI SA t map -
J H ae 2
OE or Be | Goa grees fae wr qlee nen | fo == | ui
Ege yr tat’ Bir 2 od
= SE en ed Se LA I TE GI 3 A, 210] Te en A wee we | fo a {of
R hota. mess |
EEC
After completing this chapter, we will be able to-
# explain the important aspects of a word processor;
# describe the technique of using a word processor;
» explain the important aspects ol a spreadsheet;
# idnetify the fields of using a spreadsheet;
» describe the technique of using a spreadsheet;
» edit by using a word processor;
# keep the details of account by using a spreadsheet.


--- Page 62 ---
My Writings and Accounts 57

My Writing on Word Processor

‘Writing is a medium of expression. We have to write for different needs. It might

be a piece of literature like poem, short story. novel, diary, etc. In our daily life.

we have to maintain different kinds of accounts, both big and small, like
expenditures of daily necessities, house rent and result sheet of examination, ete.

Once, writing and keeping these accounts were very difficult, but now we have

a lot of softwares for doing these works due to the development of information

and communication technology. These softwares are called office softwares.

These softwares can be used in our desktop, laptop and smartphone. We have

word processors for writing and spreadsheet analysis software. You have got a

preliminary idea about these in the previous class. Now you will get advanced

ideas regarding these topics,

‘Writing of anything means bringing the imaginary world to reality m words. We

know that human beings started the art of writing to communicate their thoughts

and their ideas and convey their imagination to others. Now ICT is being used in
this work. and the importance of word processing 1s immense m this regard.

Something written is required for receiving and presenting information on

television, mobile phone or computer. Now all types of writing are done by the

help of the word processor. The word processor provides lots of facilities in
terms of writing.

+ Any correction in writing can be done immediately. Because of the varieties
of editing options, any piece of writing can be presented aesthetically.

+ A piece of writing can be presented in different ways, for example, by

enlarging or shortening the font-size, colouring, making boxes. etc.

+ There are facilities of inserting new paragraphs, deleting parts or rearranging
the whole writing without composing the piece of writing from the
beginning.

+ A document can be more attractive by inserting photographs, graphs, tables,

charts, elc.

+ A document can be saved and used again at any time. The same work needs

not be done repeatedly.

+ Any part of a document can be copied to another one. if necessary.

S
=

Forma-8, ICT-(9-10)


--- Page 63 ---
58 Information and Communication Technology

+ Ttis possible on work with several documents simultaneously.

» By using find-replace command. a word in a big document can be found
and replaced quickly.

* When a document is needed for a repeated use, it can be saved as template to
avoid the wastage of time. For example, if it is required to prepare a
lab-report every week, it can be saved as a template.

* In a large document, such as. a research paper. tables. references. images,
bibliography, ete. can be inserted and edited within a very short time,

* Spelling errors can be corrected easily by the spell-checker. Automatic
correction of spelling is also possible in the word processor with its built-in
programmes,

= It is possible to print a document as many times as required by saving it.

+ A document can be sent to any destination through the medium of
electronic communication.

» Files prepared in the word processor can be preserved easily.

+ File management. an indispensable part of the modern office management,
bas become easier for the word processor.

Besides, the word processing software provides more facilities. The number of

users are gradually increasing day by day due Lo its usefulness.

In the previous class. you learnt the process of creating and opening a new

document in the word processor. Now we will learn some new techniques for

which you need to use your knowledge and skills you have developed earlier.

Office Buttons and Its Options

A new window will open after running word 2007. This Es icon at the lefi

corner above this window is the office button. The options you will find by

clicking the button are shown in the following image:
BS
EH


--- Page 64 ---
My Writings and Accounts 59
20 | : dr SE
5 ar | re Bom FT
3 5 rR RE 3 datum
PR ome | Inset. SH
= - o — — bl —_— , A Femun
bi =a i (EET utton | lis diet]
! hy Sap) emesmmena Pde. »
my 55 Co 24 seas
~ J Format Painter | =~ I=
a EE
Clipboard re
| rcs! selenite A oi vee
The following options are most important:
New: This button is to be clicked for opening a new document.
Open: It is to be clicked to open a document saved previously.
Save: To save a document, this button is to be clicked.
Save as: This button is to be clicked to save a document in several different
names keeping the original one.
Close: This button is 10 be clicked to close an opened document.
Formatting Text: Selecting Font Style and Colour
You have already learnt how to write using a word processor. What will be the
impression if an organised piece of writing is presented in a colourful way?
Certainly, it will look good. This task is called "Formatting Text."
fan = » Font Font Size
J@- =
Sai”
~ EEA =
BE, sutonmyy | -J14 JA a7 I[=5] [E
- = : LL pe—
|=" Ff Format Painter | |B £ Ca =a |
=) Tormey i“
Ga g
BS


--- Page 65 ---
60 Information and Communication Technology
There are letters of different styles in a word processor. These are called ‘Font’.
In formatting a text, the selection of font comes first, This selection is done from
the name of the font of font group from the drop-down box on the home-menu.
Pick the font that you like out of numerous fonts. Sometimes, it is required to use
fonts of different styles either to highlight or specify words or phrases. In that
case, select the requisite section of writing, select the font in the similar way.
Click the number from the dropdown box at the right side of the font box to
determine the font size. You can select the font colour as you like. Clicking on
the icon of the dropdown box of font group, the colour can be selected. There are
more facilities of fonts in the font group of home tab.
Activity BN
Composing a paragraph from your textbook in the word processor, format it by
using different font style, size and colour and finally save the document, giving
a name.
Formatting Text: Bullets, Numbering and Line Spacing
Our Fruits Our Rivers
+ Mango 1. The Padma
+ Blackberry 2. The Meghna
a 3. The Jamuna
“Latent 4. The Surma
+ Jackfruit 5. The Bhairab
+ Coconut 6. TheTista
Sometimes we make lists of different things, and use either signs, or letters or
numbers to maintain serials. This is called bullets and numbering in the word
Processor, Ew E——————
There is an icon command for bullets and =z 4= Ii EE al |
numbering in the paragraph group of the 1e= — — - a —
home tab, ei Riad Cad]
) = =| EaEniT [iow |* (vm) © * 0c tt Re
EE of BEd B=
/ swswb = Line Spacing : This tool is used to determine the
space between two lines.
8


--- Page 66 ---
My Writings and Accounts 61
| Write down the names of some of your favourite cricket players by using
bullets and numbering.
Formatting Text : Table and Different Illustration
The insert tab of ribbon is used to insert a table, image. clip art. different
shapes, chart text box, word art, etc. into a document.
= Ty
RT ir a TE Tr err |
Insert Table —
[~ (Ohad sme seem Click the (1) Insert tab on the Mee a
eto = Lol 8805 3 ribbon of word 2007 to add a f WZ Tf
fy ©) = table. (2) Then click table [asm J
dogooooooonl and click (3) Insert table. [| & Meme he 5
{mm mim wm . 7 amg contents
las SasaeE You will get a dialogue box | . Lemeunse
HS FOC seis where you have to select the f | PE
|HEEHEERHAE) number of columns and Cems]
© Er— CS
I prc R §
[S20 [| Make a group of 10 students, and arrange the name,
oe fither’s rama, age and rol umber of each student a
. table.
Insert Picture
By inserting pictures, document
can be presented in attractive
way. For example. you are | jem
watching a lot of pictures aes
along with writings in this = BE | [Fal Be iy =] |
text. You have to click the page fis y OR ‘Shapes SmanAt Chant |
insert tab of the ribbon of es Ce
word 2007. Then click the
picture icon of the illustration group. A dialogue box will come. Select a space
for the picture and the picture will be inserted into the document. Besides, 5
2


--- Page 67 ---
B62 Information and Communication Technology
facilities of inserting clipart, shapes, smart art, chart, etc. are provided in the
illustration group.
Insert a picture in the document prepared by you with the help of your teacher.
Insert Word Art
—— pee—— You can insert fonts of different
EeEras pet E8% styles from the insert tab, and to
tad LT Your Textere choose your style, you have to click
Shei! Vonlha erdlet w2r111 Wm word art of insert tab's text group. A
a we, Site Pe dialogue box will come, and you
Ira can Will get the desired style of your
text after selecting the font.
Setting up Margin
® It is required to click the page lay
: Page Layout s Maing oul tab of the ribbon to determine
fin T=. oo] Breaks the margins of the text. Then
Je ) LJ Te Fhe Mme clicking the margin icon. desired
|| Mme Sreien Si CR easton | margin is to be set. Different options
A mesesawl® of margins will be on the screen
when you click on the margin icon. You can select the margin from the options
or use your own margin clicking the custom margin.
Activity : 1 ) I
Render the name of your school in different styles of word art.
Activity : 2 oo
Set the margin after preparing a document.
Line Spacing of Paragraph
Click the page lay out tab to T° pm————7
select the space between lines =r [oa er |
i Fur 12 setore
of a document. It is needed to iid (CR bl debe 2
Sie 1 poms bios ma | Bmw \iBme oC)
g after lines in spacing of the = Falagi =


--- Page 68 ---
My Writings and Accounts 63
paragraph group. The command can be given after composing the document. In
that case, first, the section of the document in which line spacing will be
inserted should be selected. Then it can be determined as per the instructions
given above.

Activity

Compose a part from either from your Bengali or English textbook and

determine the line spacing.
Insert Page Number
Inserting page number on every page is an =) =] 7] ] aid
important task while composmg any document. shila fet = Siri
Clicking the page number of the header and footer Le SEE mr ema .

* = . 5 zl Gottomot page a
group in the insert tab on the ribbon. the right | de Massing v
option can be chosen. You can insert page number Bf cmpupemon |
either on the top or at the bottom of the page. 8 Sind

Save a document composed by you giving page number.
Spelicheck and correction
One of the great benefits of word processing software is spellchecking. Any
spelling mistakes anywhere in the document can be checked and corrected.
Grammar can also be corrected in many cases. New words can be added to the
program's dictionary for spellchecking. The spellchecker detects misspelled
words and presents some possible correct words, so that the user can choose the
correct word. At this time, the default

a Towle and Ceara frie U5]

language of the dictionary has to below, 1
determined, Otherwise, the apparent [|e smetegivinyiiindioisingms <1 [mnie
correct spelling may appear incorrect. a
For example, if a word processor |, = i
dictionary has American English | Eom gee |
language sclected and the word er]
document colour is entered, it will be —— 2
detected as a misspelling. Because | gun. | —e &
colour is spelled in British English, it E


--- Page 69 ---
64 Information and Communication Technology
would be color in American English. Also, the spellchecker identifies scientific
names, names of individuals, organizations or places as errors. The user has to
ensure whether these words are correct or not.
Spreadsheet and My Accounts
Analysis of Spreadsheet
Let us have a look again on what the specialities of spreadsheet analysis are.
Specialities of’ Spreadsheet Analysis:

It is possible to work with statistics and letter-based data;

It is advantageous for any kind of accounts;

Classification is easier for the rows and columns:

1t is possible to work with voluminous data by using formulae:

“i LEER Nel Newat at - 0 x
B= LE REE a wes Cy
[Fhe om nme ge ee KR TT EE
BINA h A BRERE Heim: dr om At |
I EEL. ip A SL. SS. SR... J
EL TT EE —— a

FETT =" Soi fob obo] 8]
=3
El
a
5
a
aie ha,
- — p—
%
g


--- Page 70 ---
My Writings and Accounts 65
+ Analysis of data can easily be done by using different functions
methodically;
+ Data can be presented with graphs, charts, etc.
Different Uses of Spreadsheet
A spreadsheet is an interactive computer application software used for
organisation, analysis and storage of data in tabular forms.
Different uses of spreadsheet are given below:
« analysing exam results in the education sector:
maintaining income and expenditure accounts;
» preparing budgets;
« maintaining records of employee salaries;
« making reservations for services, such as airlines;
«+ calculating and analysing income tax;
+ counting voles in elections;
«+ analysing and evaluating performances of players.
Technique of Using Spreadsheet
You have already got some fundamental concepts of spreadsheet. You will get
advanced ideas in this book.
Multiplying
Put the formula in the result cell for multiplying in a spreadsheet. Formula
always start with "=" equal to. Multiplying process is of two kinds:
=_
K i wpe 1. Usually press the enter
| fre ri ep RR NE Result button, after putting the
[| Rice “ “0 [0 £1] cn formula into the result cell.
1
2. Press enter button writing spreadsheet function= PRODUCT in the result
cell and giving the cell range.
5
Forma-9, ICT-(9-10)


--- Page 71 ---
66 Information and Communication Technology
Lo -@. J] -=-PRODUCT(BIC3)
a. as 1 es 1. cc | I
IE Monthly Shopping Expenditure
2 | Product Name Price (1k) Quantity (Kg) Expenditure
www
4
The facility of multiplying by using function is that the result of multiplication
of numerous cells can be done by range, if necessary. The process of
multiplying 3 cells is shown in the picture below:
| oa -@.  f|-rroDucTiAz:ca)
qa [8 [oc | J
1 Volume of Cube
2 Length Width Height Volume
ow
Ea]
Activity.
Opening a file of spreadsheet, multiply some imaginary data.
Method of Dividing
Dividing can also been done on the spreadsheet by a formula. You have to
write =A 1/B1" in the result cell to divide Al by Bl. Here the sign / is used as
the sign of division.
: = = = J
ET - EE | Activity
— Try to find out the
TH April 2014 result by using the
— — — — formula.
= : s .


--- Page 72 ---
My Writings and Accounts 67
Calculation of Percentage
How much is 15% of Tk. 400? What is the selling price at profit 16% at the
purchasing cost Tk. 12007 We frequently need to do this sort of calculations in
our practical life. We can do these calculations on the spreadsheet.
To solve the first problem on the spreadsheet, put formula =A3*B3% in the result
cell. The process of writing the formula in the result cell by using keyboard is to
write the sign = and click the cell where 400 is written. Then press * and click the
cell where 15 is written. Then writing % (press shift key and 5), press the enter
button. You will get your result.
The formula =A3*B3%+A3 should be used to solve the second problem. The
process of writing this formula is similar to the process mentioned above.
Solve the problems of calculating percenfage under the guidance of your
The monthly besic salary of Mr. Chowdhury is Tk 16500. He draws residential
alluwanceql the mio UF 339 and medical allowance Tc 700. Ho scribes Tic
90 to the benevolent fund. What is his monthly net salary?
* Because of the version of software there may be difference in title and menu bar.
a
Ei


--- Page 73 ---
68 My Writings and Accounts
Exercise
1. Why is a document saved as a template?
A. For Aesthetics B. For frequent use
C. For rearrangement D. For the facilities of making copies
2. Which one of the following is used for saving the document for the first time?
A. New B. Open
C. Save D. Save As
3. By using spreadsheet analysis —
i. preparing a text is easier.
il. a theory can be applied.
iii. data can be arranged,
‘Which one is correct?
A i&il B. i&iii
C. ii & iii Di, il & ii
Read the section below, and answer the question nos. 4 & 5:
Soumilra writes on nature and environment lor a newspaper voluntarily.
Sometimes he has to attach picture of flowers, birds, or rivers. He is an
accountant by profession. Ile has to keep the account of the employee and
place a monthly report.
4. Which software does Soumitra has to use for his voluntary work?
A. Word Processor B. Spreadsheet
C. Graphics D. Database
5. In his professional work, Soumitra has to use —
i. the template.
il. theory.
iii. data arrangement,
‘Which one is correct?
A i&il B. i&iii
C. ii & iii D. i, ii &iii
6. What kind of formatting is used in word processor for making a list?
Describe with examples.
El 7. Write five advantages of analysing spreadsheet.


--- Page 74 ---
Fifth Chapter
Multimedia and Graphics
BL rs re ee
DEERE nn fn SR
— i
| ite freer oven ov
8 mmm (6)
= Ema
ES -
—
—— —— Eee od
After completing this chapter, we will be able to-
»# explain the concept of multimedia:
» describe the method of multimedia:
» identify the fields of using multimedia;
> explain the idea of presentation software:
> analyse the significance of presentation software;
» describe the technique of using presentation software;
» explain the idea of graphics:
>» describe the technique of using graphics software;
> prepare slides on different topics by using presentation software and
present it;
» draw creative pictures by using graphics software and present it.
Concept of Multimedia
[Human beings have been using different media to express themselves since the
ancient ime. Writing is an expressive medium, and so are the sound and image.
Multimedia is the integration ol multiple forms of expressive media, such as
texts, graphics, drawings, photographs, videos etc. With the evolution of
civilisation and development in technology, these mediums have been used in


--- Page 75 ---
70 Multimedia and Graphics
various ways. Specifically in today's digital era, lhe nature of these media has
also changed.
The media of the analogue age are not the major media of the digital age. Rather
the media of analogue age have changed in motive. Once, the media were used
separately. but nowadays they are harmoniously combined together. The
potentiality of multi-media has been enhanced with the Integration of
programming ability of digital machines. Hence, it is also called 'interactive
multimedia’ because of its multiple dimensions and different programming
abilities. Interactive multimedia is widely known to people. In summary,
multimedia means numerous media. Interactive media means the media with
which the users can connect and interact.
Multimedia is the combination of different expressive media. We express
ourselves by using, at least, three media which are colour, image and sound.
These three media have various forms too. They appear before us either
individually or collectively. Different kinds of media are known to us. such as
paper publication, radio, television, video, cinema, video games, educative
software, webpage, etc. We can call television, video, and cinema multimedia,
but video games, educative software, and webpage are called interactive
multimedia.
Multimedia is usually captured by a digital machine or device. It can be directly
presented on the stage or projected in a different way. Sometimes some
electronic devices are called multimedia because they contain the information
and directly display it in different forms. If we want to use three media in one
activity, we should start from the cinema. In the last phase of 19th century, in
1895, with the invention of cinema, text, graphics, sound and movement were
added to it. Therefore. cinema is called the earlier invention of multimedia. Even
though this form of multimedia came into being ages ago, the integration of the
computer to it is a quite a recent development.
Media of Multimedia
We know that the computer, the most popular digital device, is widely known as
the calculating machine, Processing and transferring data was another important
work ol the computer. Later on, it was widely used for typing.
In the beginning, only one medium was used to do all these works, i.e. text.
However, gradually graphics and sound were used too. Besides, the computer
has the ability to do programming. In fact, computers are capable of creating an
mteractive experience for users with the combination of text, graphics and
sound. Now multimedia promised dynamic experiences than that of the previous
i time. Multimedia is used not only in the computer, but also in mobile phones,
g smartphones, tablets, and other digital devices.


--- Page 76 ---
Information and Communication Technology 71
The main mediums of Multimedia
Multimedia

There is a world-wide preferences for computers and they tend to replace the

conventional machines.

1. Text: Any work in relation to written text is done on computers world-wide.
Once it was done by the typewriter. At present, computers are used for all
kinds of writing tasks in offices to professional printing houses.

2. Graphics: Computers are used for graphics design, editing, and so on. In our
country, the use of computer is very limited in graphics design, painting,
drawing, and even in commercial graphics included in Fine Arts. However,
computers are widely used in printers and packaging industries. The use of
computer started in 1990s in printing, publication and graphics design. It was
first used to edit scanned photos by Photoshop. Gradually, computers have
been used in design and graphics.

3. Video: Video is a kind of graphics. It is better to call it a moving graphics.
Video is an established medium all over the world. Video has been extensively
used in TV, Home Video, Multimedia Software. Web, etc.

4. Animation: Animation is a kind of graphics. But it can be either moving
or static. It can be either 2D or 3D. The use of animation is gradually
increasing in our country. In advertisement, animation is a favourite
media, but we lack skilled people in this sector. In fact, animation
is never used as a single medium. It is combined with audio, video,
text, graphics, etc.

5. Sound or Audio: The whole world depends on computer for sound or audio
recordings, editing, ete. The analogue system has been completely rendered
obsolete in sound engineering. Now sound recording can easily be done in
computers. -

2


--- Page 77 ---
72 Multimedia and Graphics
6. Interactive Computing: In this connection, we should know a piece of
information about interactivity. Application of any style, such as Microsoft
word scroll or flash, into the text or any effects of animation into the video
does not make the text or video interactive. Something created by the
powerful authoring software like ‘Flash®, ‘Director’, and “Authorware” that
makes interaction possible between the user and the computer is called
‘Interactivity’.
Use of Multimedia in TCT
There is an increased use of multimedia in ICT.
1. As teaching aid : The use of multimedia as a teaching aid is widely used.
The learner will understand a topic easily, if multimedia is used in the class
room. The teacher can easily make the lesson effective and interactive.
Beside this, there are various kinds of multimedia software for education.
1.1. Multimedia Software : The multi-media software has just started being
made in Bangladesh recently. Multimedia technology has been used in
with 'Bangladesh-71', 'Abosor’, 'Biswakosh'. Namaj shiksha', 'Bijoy
Shishu shiksha', ete. They are not much interactive. However, we expect
that in Bangladesh, multimedia software will be definitely developed
extensively in the 21st Century.

1.2. Digital Publication : Our publication is still paper-based, but the
21st century will definitely be the century of digital publication.

2. Entertainment : Multimedia is widely used in most of the genres of
entertainment. Cinemas and plays are being made livelier by the special
effects of multimedia.

3. Advertisement : Because of the use of multimedia, advertisements have
become attractive. Both real and fictional elements can be shown in
advertisements with the help nltimedia.

4. Games : Multimedia is extensively used in computer games or video
games. Because of the use of multimedia, the games seem as real as real
life.

5. Animation: Animation is moving or static graphics or images. It can be two
dimensional or three dimensional. The use of animation in advertising images
is a favorite subject. Animation is never used as a stand-alone medium.

0 Animation is usually created by combining audio, video, text, graphics etc.
8
~


--- Page 78 ---
Information and Communication Technology 73
The man who works with text, graphics, audio, video, animation, etc. is called
the multimedia content developer. Many pieces of software like Adobe
Photoshop, 3D Studio Max, Maya, ete. are used for multimedia contents.
However, depending on the content that they develop and the interactive
applications that they use, multimedia contents developers should be called
‘multimedia programmers’ or ‘multimedia authors’. In fact. there is a
difference between developing contents and adding interactivity. Adobe
Premier and Adobe Photoshop can make an interesting piece of multimedia
content. By contrast, in order to make the multimedia content interactive,
‘Director’, a programme of creating software, combines the media made in
‘Premier’ and ‘Photoshop’ and creates an interactive application.
In future, the demand and the number of multimedia programmes will definitely
never lessen. The demand of multimedia content developers and programmers,
along with business software developers and maintenance experts. is also
increasing.
Presentation Software
Creating Presentation
Tt is the age of exchanging information and ensuring human welfare through free
flow of formation. Now, the exchanging of information among the
researchers, educationists, social workers, and professionals of national and
international levels has been emphasized most. Meetings, seminars,
symposiums, and workshops are frequently arranged in order to ensure free
access to information. As a result, experts have up-to-date information about
their respective fields.
Presentation softwares such as PowerPoint, Picasa, Impress etc. are mainly used
to present information in an attractive and effective way in meetings, seminars,
symposiums, and workshops. ‘PowerPoint’ is a piece of popular software or
application of Microsoft Office. It is called ‘Presentation Software’ too.
Information can be presented atiractively with texts. graphics, audio and video
through Power Point. In fact, right at the moment there is some alternative to
Power Point software. That is why it is widely used for presenting information
in meetings, seminars, symposiums, and workshops.
Just a word document in a Microsoft Word Programme, has numerous pages, a
Power Point presentation also has several slides. A page containing more than 5
EB
Forma-10, ICT-(9-10)


--- Page 79 ---
74 Multimedia and Graphics
one slides is called ‘Handout’. A draft should be made for organized presentation
in Power Point. This draft is called ‘Slide Layout’.
Opening Power Point Programme and Creating Slides
To open Power Point Programme
1. At the left corner below the screen, “Start” is written. It is the ‘Start’ button.
Click the ‘Start’ button by taking the mouse pointer on it, and a menu will be
viewed on the screen.
Place mouse pointer on the *All Programs’ command and get a ‘Fly out’
menu.
Click the ‘Microsoft Office’ menu from this ‘Fly out” menu and get the list of
all the programmes of Microsoft Office on another “Fly out” menu.
Select the "Microsoft Office Power [== = — = =~ = a =
Point’ command from this list and the pr] EE =
first slide will be shown on the | |
screen. In the main part of the slide. | =
- “Click to add title” and *Click to add ent
subtitle’ are written on the box. Co
Click both the writings and a text
box will be shown with the insertion =
pointer. Type a title and subtitle while IEaee — 2
the insertion pointer is in the box. If you click outside the box without
writing anything those two writings will be viewed again.
- Click the textbox border and press delete button after selecting, the textbox
with the writing will be deleted.
Select the textbox icon from the ribbon of the ‘Home’ menu and take the
insertion pointer inside the screen and the insertion pointer will be changed
info a text pointer. ( create a box, dragging)
- The insertion pointer will be on the box.
- The keyboard will be transformed into ‘Bangla’ for typing in Bangla.
- Select font, fontsize; colour, etc. from the toolbar and ribbon for typing work.
io
g


--- Page 80 ---
Information and Communication Technology 75
-‘'mmME om is typed selecting [Erne — irs =: =
Sutonny MT, font size 150 and blue | =~ = = eZ

colour. = =

- The textbox will remain selected
after being typed. There will remain
round and hollow selection points.
four on the four arms of the selected |FEEEE = == — 3
box and four on the four comers, Dragging these selection points. the size of
the box can be made small or big either sideways or from the top to the
bottom to contain texts. The selection will go away if vou click outside the box.

- The box can be moved to any place of the screen by clicking any arm of the

box and by dragging il.

- On the left side of the slide making window, the small version of the slide is

shown in thumbnail view.

Saving Presentation

- Give the Save command from the file menu. and Save as dialogue box will

come.

- Type the name of the file in Save as dialogue box. Suppose that the name is

‘My Country.”

- Click the button ‘Ok’ in the dialogue box, and the presentation will be

saved as ‘My Country”.

- The file can be opened next time to complete the unfinished work.

Adding New Slide

Many slides may be included in a single presentation. To add a new slide

1. Select the command of New Slide' on the ribbon of the “Home' menu or
Press Ctrl+M from the keyboard. A new slide will be added.

- “Click to add title” and *Click to add text’ will be shown on the newly added
slide. Both the writings will be deleted following the previous directives.
The small version of the newly added slide will be shown on the left side of
the Window in thumbnail view.

2. Type the title of the new shide ‘@* (47% 95794" in the textbox following the
process described earlier. g


--- Page 81 ---
76 Multimedia and Graphics

3, Following the same process, type the three titles in three different boxes:
ShGR TIER RY (FIRE SEN ATAFCR (F067 ome h ;
fir Fife WEEE VE Toe Seay ap CT ER
AMT xe WE Hw MRS FT 9 WE EE ee en en
wie fey wa ly a
Yay ATER du forma we few fre a in LE
Tor ufeyrs Few wees coed far whe pe————————
“diet witts 75  ——

msniinns

- The three boxes will be placed one after another from top to bottom. The
title will be on the top. Another slide will be added following the process of’
adding the second one. That will be the third slide. To add this slide

4. Type "47am" as Lhe title of the new slide — - 5
in the textbox following the process ——
described carlier. E Ei

. . = =

- By adding numerous slides, complete the L_LEh
work of presentation as required. 4am oB =

- After preparing the primary presentation, = I
adding different varieties make the eniire Es —————
presentation altractive.

Display Slides in Presentation

Making two slides for presentation, check it whether it has been workable as

well as presentable. For completing the task,

- Press the button F5 from the keyboard or select the Slide Show on the ribbon
of the View menu or click the icon of Slide Show on the status bar, the first
slide of the presentation will be displayed.

- For viewing the next slide of the presentation, press the right arrow of the
keyboard, and to go back, press the left arrow.

- For starting the next slide show from the middle of the presentation, press
Shift F5 button.

- Press the Esc button to revert to the window of editing from the window of
slide show.

]
5


--- Page 82 ---
Information and Communication Technology 77
You can be sure whether the slides are presentable or not by checking at any
phase of preparing the slides.

Changing the Background of Slides

The color of background can be changed either during the processing or after

the making of the slides. Any image can be used as the background of the

slide.

Adding or Changing Background to the Shide

1. Keep the slide open or active to add a background to it. The first slide of the
current presentation is kept open.

2. If you click on the drop-down bar of [_ = —— 3
Background Style on the right of the Fle El = i m= =
ribbon of the Design menu, a palette of | — g
gradient and solid color will come on the TE.
screen. If the mouse pointer is placed on a ad ([EEE—,
color or gradient of the palette, in the i
original slide, the background of that didi
color or gradient will appear. —

To use more colors, textures and images ETT ii

1. Select Format Background at the bottom. and a dialogue box of that name
will come on the screen,

2. Clicking the Solid Fill Radio button on the left above the Format
Background dialogue box, make it active. Click Color Drop-Down Arrow,
and a color palette will be viewed on the screen. The color swatch, which
will be clicked from this palette. will fill the background of the slide.

3. Clicking radio button of Picture or Texture Fill, make it active, and Texture
drop-down will be viewed instead of color, Click this drop-down arrow,
and different kinds of texture will be shown. The texture swatch, which
will be clicked. should be selected from the original slide.

4. The dialogue box called Insert Picture will come if the File button below
Insert Box is clicked as the radio button of Picture or Texture Fill is selected.
Select the picture opening the folder of the dialogue box that contains the
picture.

a
Q
ES


--- Page 83 ---
78 Multimedia and Graphics
5. Click the Insert Box button of the dialogue box, and it will disappear, and
the picture will be set as the background of the slide.
6. To remove the imposed background —
Click the Solid Fill radio button of the dialogue box of Format Background
and make it active. Click the drop-down arrow of Color, the palette will be
viewed on the screen. Select White from this color palette.
7. Click the Close button of the dialogue box.
Insert Picture in Slide
Sometimes, it may require to insert a picture on the slide.
To insert a picture into a slide
1. Click the icon of Picture on the ribbon of [S55 rm wows
the Insert menu, and the dialogue box of |= =S® 2d SoA 00 oe
Tnsert Picture will come on the screen, rE
2. Open the folder of the dialogue box of = |
Insert Picture in which names of pictures —
are available. After selecting the picture —
vou prefer, click the Insert button, The
selected picture will be added to the
slide.
3. Clicking the resize box and dragging it, the size of the picture can be
resized and replaced elsewhere, if required.
Inserting Transition into Slide
Usually slides are presented one after another, and effects are used to shift
from one slide to another. This effect is called ‘Transition’. It works on the
slide into which transition is applied by keeping it open. To insert Transition
into a slide
1. Keep the first slide open.
2. Click the Animations menu to activate it.
[ smmstors | Staton Wom ew
pr = ai + & remem seu
EEE SI ES ee
5 8 = = vad opi Te
= | ————— |


--- Page 84 ---
Information and Communication Technology 79
On the ribbon of Animations menu, a row of Transition samples will be viewed.
On the ribbon of Animations menu, a row of Transition sample will be viewed.
The sample on which the mouse pointer is placed will be viewed in the slide.
There are three arrows on the right to pick more from the given samples. If you
click repeatedly on the middle arrow, a new row will be viewed with every press
of the mouse button. If you click the arrow on the top, a column will appear. If
you click the arrow at the bottom, all the samples will be viewed. Click the
sample chosen, and the (ransition will be applied to the slide.
3. If you want to apply the same transition to all the slides. click ‘Apply to
All” button on the right side after applying it to the first slide.
4. If you want to apply a different transition to every slide, you have to apply
it separately following the same process for every slide.
Applying Transition Separately in Text
One slide may contain several textboxes. There are texts in three textboxes in
the second slide of the current presentation. If different transitions are applied
in these three textboxes, they will come to slide in three different processes. To
insert transition to the textbox
1. Keep the second slide open.
2. Select the textbox.
3. Click the Animations menu to activate it.
A command called Custom Animation will be added to the bottom of
Animation. Click Custom Animation and a palette will come.
4. Select Entrance from the Add Effect drop-down list of Custom Animation,
and a list of custom transition will appear. From this list
- ‘Blinds’ is selected for the first textbox.
- “Fly in’ is selected for the second textbox.
- ‘Diamond’ is selected for the third textbox.
- If you select ‘More Effects’ from this list, another list of transition will be
viewed. Selection of any transition from this list will show the same effect.
5. In order to remove a transition from a specific textbox. select it. Click the
‘Remove’ button to exclude the transition. &
a
2
a


--- Page 85 ---
80 Multimedia and Graphics

Apply Sound to Transition

Keep the slide open to add sound to the transition, and select the name of a sound

from the drop-down list of Transition Sound. Camera is selected for the first

slide. Click Apply to All button for applying the same sound to all the slides.

If different sound is required to apply in every slide, separate application of

sound following the same process for every slide will be needed.

Add Video to the Slide

Video can be added to any slide, if necessary. Usually video is added to the

introductory slide. Suppose that video will be added to the introductory slide of

the presentation on Our Country. For this

- Keep the introductory slide of the presentation open.

- Clicking the Movie drop-down on the ribbon of the Insert menu. get “Movie
from the file’ command. Select the command and ‘Insert Movie dialogue
box’ will come.

- A movie file will be selected from the video folder of the Insert Movie
dialogue box.

- Click the Ok button of the dialogue box.

- A message box with a question “How do you want the movie to start in the
slide show?” will appear.

- The Messaging box will contain two buttons ‘Automatically’ and ‘When
Clicked.

- The Messaging box will disappear if required button is pressed, and the
video file will be added to the slide. You can place the file anywhere on the
slide by dragging if and resize it by dragging the resize box.

- The first slide will appear on the screen if you press F5 on the keyboard.

- The Thumbnail view of the video file will be shown on the screen.

- Click the Thumbnail of the video file and it will start playing.
If ‘Automatically’ was selected at the time of adding the file, it will start
playing with the display of the slide.

& Make a power point presentation about your school and present it.


--- Page 86 ---
Information and Communication Technology 81

Graphics

Importance of Graphics

Photographs, drawings, paintings, illustrations. designs, etc. have to be scanned

and transferred to the computer first for editing. Now pictures captured by a

digital camera can directly be copied to the computer. After the editing, these

photos can be used on printed invitation cards, posters, banners, advertisements,
etc. through the digital media.

There are numerous programmes to edit photos in computer. Of these

programmes, Photoshop is popular worldwide. Brightening or darkening the

entire or a part of picture, designing the cover of a book with several pictures,
making posters, cutting off any irrelevant part of the picture, erasing blotchy
marks on the picture, ete. can easily be done by Photoshop.

Photoshop, an editing software should have been installed in the computer or it

should be installed. Editing can be done on a file created earlier.

To open Photoshop program

1. Click the start or Logo button of Windows and place the mouse pointer on
the ‘All Programs’ command, and get the Fly out menu.

2. Click Adobe Photoshop Programs, from this menu and ‘Adobe Photoshop®
will open.

To prepare new file in Photoshop program

- Click ‘New’ from the ‘File’ menu after opening up the Photoshop program,
and get 'New' dialogue box.

= You will get ‘Untitled-1" selected in the square space of ‘Name’ of the
dialogue box. Pressing the backspace button of the keyboard, erase the
writing and type a name. It will be the name of the file. Suppose that
‘Practice’ is typed in the “Name” box.

If you type the name in this stage, you need not to type il further. While
closing the file, a new dialogue box will come when you will go to close the
file.

- Inthe box of ‘Width® and ‘Height” in New Dialogue Box, type numbers on
the measuring unit ‘inch’, for example, width of 7 inches and height of 8
inches. There 1s a dropdown menu to determine the unit of measurement on &
the right side of these two boxes such as inches, pixels, piacas, points, cm, 2

Forma-11. ICT-{9-10)


--- Page 87 ---
82 Multimedia and Graphics
mm. Select the requisite unit from this dropdown menu. Fix the
measurement by inches. Suppose that the measuring unit of the present task
is inch, and 7 in the box of width and 8 in the box of height have been
typed.

- The Resolution, for example, 72 Pixel, is kept unchanged.
Images or pictures are created in Photoshop by pixels. Pixel is the smallest
square unit of image. 72 pixels per inch mean crossing 72 lines vertically and
horizontally in per inch space. The total number of pixels in one square inch
will be 72'72= 5184. The number of pixels in per square inch is called
resolution. If 130 is typed in the box of pixel, the resolution will be
130°130=16900. If an image is enlarged, the pixels could be visible. This view
is called pixelated. In simple words, it is called split image.

- From the dropdown menu of color mode in the dialogue box, RGB.
CMYK, Bitmap, Grayscale, and from Lab Color RGB can be selected as
all the images on the monitors of computer, television. and other electronic
media are viewed in RGB mode. RGB is the abbreviation of red, green and
blue.

- There are three options in the ‘Background Contents’ of the dialogue box.
The options are White, Background and Transparent.

- If “White” is selected from the dropdown menu, the background will be
white. If a colour is selected from Background toolbox, it will turn into the
colour of the canvas. If transparent is selected, the background will be
transparent and checkered. The background option can be selected as you
like. White can be selected here too.

- Without following the steps described above, Default Photoshop Size can
be selected from the ‘Preset dropdown list. Thus, all the units of Photoshop
will be selected as per the requisition.

- Completing the measurement of the dialogue box, press ‘0K’.

- A window will be viewed as per the measurement given in the dialogue
box. On the lefi of the screen, Practice @ 100% (RGB/8) will be viewed.
This bar is called the title bar. If any name is not used in the Name box of
the new dialogue box, Untitled-1@ 100% (RGB/8) will be viewed on the
title bar as the file name.

2


--- Page 88 ---
Information and Communication Technology 83

- Double click on the title bar, and it will be viewed on the screen.

= The menu bar is located under the title bar and the option bar is below the

menu bar.

- The ruler is located below the option bar.

- The Photoshop work 1s to be done below the ruler on the screen.

The screen can be com- ’

pared to the canvas of o~ pitied a —

painting of an artist. On the BEN i ——rl

left side of the canvas, are Bl r=

the brush, color, and differ- I =

ent kinds of editing tools, 34] =

and on the right side is the La i

palette HH of er

= PRES 1

The Toolbox of Photoshop and Palette Distinction

At least 69 kinds of tools are there in the Photoshop. Besides, numerous options

of palettes. dialogue boxes, etc. are there. There is a relationship among different

1ools, option palettes, and dialogue boxes.

In addition, the brush colour or foreground and colour conirol icon are there for

the canvas or background and visual space control icon for the monitor, mask

icon, etc. Ifa line is drawn either with the pencil or with the brush tool, the color
of foreground works as the color of brush.

- Different palettes are kept on the right side of the screen. The minimise icon
is viewed above the right side of the palette. The palette will be minimised if
you click the minimise icon. It will be again extended if you click the
maximise icon.

= Ifyou double click on the top bar of the palette, it will be =|
either maximised or minimised. con 2 Ah

- Clicking and dragging the top bar, the palette can be ea Ci
replaced anywhere. psp] & reson]

- There is a toolbox on the left side of the screen. It has == ofan oe
included different kinds of tools for different jobs. The [ed FE Hed
tool, which is required to work, becomes activated when = LaZr"
clicked. If the mouse pointer is taken inside the screen after i hg
selecting a tool of the box, the tool is either viewed on ils eras oo sean Ca
actual size or as a plus (+) sign, and the editing tools are IL
viewed as circles. T=] q

ES


--- Page 89 ---
84 Multimedia and Graphics

Selection of Tools and Acquaintance of Move Tools

- 3 selection tools and 1 move tool are viewed on the top of the tool box. At the
bottom of the right side of some tools, a small arrow sign Z is viewed. It
indicates that in the same position, more tools of the similar types remain
there, For example, 4 Marquee tools in the same position and 3 Lasso tools
in different positions are there.

- Place the mouse pointer on the tool, and the name of the tool will be
viewed. Click the tool to activate it. If the mouse pointer is brought inside
the screen, it will be viewed either in the own shape of the selected tool or
with a plus (+) sign.

- Making squares, circles and objects is possible with the marquee tool within
the selected tool.

- By pressing the shift button and dragging Rectangular Marquee Tool, a
perfect square, and pressing the shift button and dragging Elliptical Marquee
Tool, a perfect circle can be drawn. I you drag while pressing the Alt button,
selections of square and circle can be extended from the centre point.

Shifting of Selection

- After making the square of selection by Rectangular Marquee Tool,
remove the finger from the mouse, and the selection of square will be
viewed on the screen.

- Ifyou take the mouse pointer inside the selection, a rectangular icon will be
viewed below the pointer. Pressing and dragging, the selection can be
shifted elsewhere.

- Select the Deselect’ command from the Select menu or click the mouse
pointer outside the selection while it is floating. Tt will go away.

Fill Colour in the Floating Sclection

- There are colour icons of ‘Foreground’ and (4 ckn
“Background” at the boltom of the toolbox. 1 -

The icon above is for “Foreground” and the -
ican below is for the ‘Background’. To fill a
selection with colour while floating: lig LY
La
5 Press Alt+backspace, and the selection will tf
g be filled with the colour of the brush or QQ, 7.


--- Page 90 ---
Information and Communication Technology 85
Foreground. If you press Ctrl+backspace or only backspace, it will be filled
with the colour of Background or canvas.

- The selection filled with colour will float. It can be shifted elsewhere by
dragging.

- The object will stay at the same position after shifting the selection.

- If the shifting is done by pressing the Ctrl button, the object being shifted
will be cut.

- Press Cirl and Alt during shifting, and the object being shifted will be copied.

- The selection will go away il you click the mouse pointer outside the
selection.

The Use of Feather

- Typing the number from 0-250 in the box of feather on the option bar, the
edge of the object can be softened. The room of the feather extends equally
from the edge of the object to the inside and outside. If 10 is typed in
the feather box. the softness of the edge will be 20.

- The feather effect will be activated by pressing enter button after writing
different numerical figures in the box. Fill colour by using either the
rectangular marquee tool or the elliptical marquee tool, and the effect of
feather will be visible then. The effect will be still viewed after pasting the
cut or copied object.

Select with Lasso Tool and Polygonal Lasso Tool

- Select the lasso tool in the toolbox, FEE———

Numerous selections can be made With |e ry
lasso tool such as By = i
2 I

- Clicking and dragging on the canvas after by | >
selecting the lasso tool, selections of |; |
a non-circular and uneven edges can be bi i 2
made. If you release the finger from the |=" .
pressing position on the mouse while [24
dragging. a closed selection will be [= |
created from that position to the first ey
clicking point.

- By clicking inside the selection while floating, it can be shifted elsewhere by 8


--- Page 91 ---
86 Multimedia and Graphics
dragging. Filling any floating selection with colour, it can be filled either
with the same or a different colour.

- Opacity is used to determine the thickness of colour.

- The Fill’ dialogue box will come after giving the 'Fill' command under the
‘Edit’ Menu.

- The foreground is kept selected in the ‘Use’ box of ‘Contents” under the
‘Fill’ dialogue box. It can be changed from the list of the dropdown menu, if
required.

- In the opacity square of the dialogue box, type a number to determine the
thickness of colour. The full intensity of colour is 100%. If the percentage is
small, the colour will be light. Type 50 in the Opacity box, and click the OK
button, and the foreground of the selection will be filled with 50% of the
total thickness.

- There is opacity in the option palette of selection too, The intensity of
colour can be increased or reduced by selecting the opacity of this palette.

Stroke

- The border of the selection can be made with the *Stroke’ command.

- Select the ‘Stroke’ command under the 'Edit' menu as the selection is
floating, and you will get the ‘Stroke’ dialogue box.

- Any number from 1-16 can be typed in ‘Stroke Width Box’. The extension
of the border is determined with this number. To create the border outside.
inside or at the middle of the selection, activate any of these three options
by clicking the radio button attached with them.

- Click the ‘Ok’ button of the dialogue box.

- Borders can be created either by using the colour of the brush or of the
foreground in the Stroke process.

Saving File

- Give the ‘Save’ command from the ‘Tile’ menu, and the “Save As’ dialogue
box will be viewed.

- Inthe box of “File Name” of the 'Save As’ dialogue box, type the name of the
file, for example, Practice’.

- (Click the ‘Ok’ button in the dialogue box, and the file will be saved as

eo “Practice”.
&  - ‘Practice’ can be opened for further work later.


--- Page 92 ---
Information and Communication Technology 87

Layer

An idea of Layer is required before creating objects or editing photos. Almost at

every stage of editing photos, you have to work through Layer.

Layer 1s the screen of editing photos or the phases of a canvas. In this process,

editing can be done by putting numerous transparent canvases one after another.

If the canvas is transparent, editing becomes easier as the existing photos can be

watched, but if the canvas of the upper layer is not transparent, the editing of the

lower layer cannot be seen. If any photo with colour background is opened,

Background" will be written on the layer palette. The background will not be

transparent in spite of being white because white is a colour.

- Suppose that a file with the p rere = i
picture of a flower is opened. || fagge [= i]
‘Background’ is written on i | EET
the layer palette. An icon of a | ~1|
lock is viewed to the right of 4 |
the layer bar. It indicates that i il el
the layer has been locked. I} A
The object of a locked layer [1 L. l=oge-as
cannot be shifted by clicking
or dragging with the ‘Move’ tool.

- If *White’ is kept as ‘Background Content’ and "Background while opening
a new file, ‘Background’ will be viewed on the layer palette.

- ‘Background’ can be transformed into a layer to shift the sample picture of the
flower elsewhere.

To accomplish the task — e— O]

- Double click on If aE re
‘Background’ of the layer || Qi caiseh rim 2)
palette. and a dialogue box [| > he ems
named “New Layer” will be [| : =
shown. In the ‘Name® box i 2 Eel
‘Layer 0° will be viewed. || | PS
Click the OK button of the |S LF 3 EET
dialogue box, it will disappear, and the ‘Background’ layer will be
transformed to ‘Layer 0°. The ‘Background” layer will be ‘Layer 1" if itis
written after erasing ‘Layer 0 in the “Name” box of the dialogue box. 8


--- Page 93 ---
88 Multimedia and Graphics

- Ifyou click on any part of the picture with the ‘Background Eraser’ tool, that
part will be erased, and the layer of the palette will automatically be
transformed into ‘Layer 0°.

- If any part of the picture is erased by the Eraser tool, the layer will not be
transformed into ‘Layer 0.

Insert New Layer

Many layers should be used to work with more than one file in Photoshop. By

keeping different pictures on different layers, their arrangement and editing

should be done.

To add new layers in palette

- Click the ‘Create a New Layer’ icon below the palette, a new layer will be
added above the existing or selected layer. This layer will be a transparent
one. To create any new object in the newly added layer, shift it elsewhere if
required. If five layers are created in this way, layer no. 2 will be above layer
no. 1. no. 3 will be above no. 2. no.4 will be above no. 3. If more layers are
added, those will be arranged serially.

- The arrangement of steps can be changed it required clicking layer no.2 and
pressing on the mouse, drag it and release on layer no. 3, and it will be placed
in between layer no. 3 and 4. After the selection of dividing line between two
layers, release the pressure on the mouse.

You should remember that ‘Background Layer’ can not be shifted in this way.

Background should be transformed into layer to replace it into another stage.

Make Picture Visible and Invisible on Layers

There is the icon of an eye on the extreme left of every layer. This icon is called

‘Layer Visibility Icon". Click on the icon of eye, it will disappear along with the

picture on the screen. Click again on the empty place of the eve, and the icon will

be visible again, and the picture on that layer will be visible again. The picture
of the flower on the layer can be made visible and invisible for
experimentation.

Thumbnail Icon

There is a thumbnail icon on the right side of the icon of eye. The meaning of

thumbnail means the miniature version of a large picture. This miniature version

., onthe layer along with the picture on the sereen is viewed in the thumbnail icon.
5 It facilitates the editing of the pictures on particular layers.


--- Page 94 ---
Information and Communication Technology 89

Clustering, Integrating and Segregating Palette

Numerous palettes can be panelled together. For example. Layer, Path and

Channel can stay together. The names of the palette will remain as tabs. The tab

which is clicked will be activated. The combined situation of several palettes is

called clustered palette.

- The present palette is activated as a ‘Layer Palette’. Click the layer tab and
drag it outside the paletie to release. The Layer palette will exist as an
individual or single palette.

- Again clicking the tab of the individual Layer, release another palette
inside by dragging it. Thick lines around the palette will be viewed. Thus
the Layer taken by dragging will be included in the cluster.

- If the ‘Layer’ palette is not viewed on the screen, select the ‘Layers’
command from the “Window’ menu, and you will get the ‘Layer’ palette.

Making Layer Object

The process of making Selection and filling it with colour has been learnt. Now

we will learn how to make two simple objects with rectangular and circular

selection tools. We will learn how to write using the text tool too.

A. Crealing a rectangular object on Layer no. 1:

- Select White from the option of Background Contents of New dialogue box.
and Background will be the base of the Layer palette. For making a
transparent layer on a white background.

- Click on the icon of Create a New Layer below the palette, and a new
Layer will be added above the selected layer. This will be Layer no. 1, and
it will be transparent too.

- A rectangular selection will be created on Layer 1 with the Rectangular
Marquee Tool, and that will be filled with green colour.

- The rectangular object can be shified elsewhere by the Move tool.

B. Insert Layer no. 2 in the panel. and make a circular object:

- Click on Layer no. 1. and it will be selected.

- Click the icon of ‘Create a new layer’ below the palette, and it will be a
transparent layer.

2
Ei
Forma-12, ICT(9-10)


--- Page 95 ---
90 Multimedia and Graphics
Or

- Ifthe New Layer command is selected from the dropdown menu of the layer
palette, the New Layer dialogue box will be viewed. In the square space of
the Name of the dialogue box, Layer 2 will be viewed. Type Circle in the
Name box and press the Ok button. and the dialogue box will disappear. A
new layer named Circle will be inserted above layer no.1 in the layer palette.

- Now create a circular selection with the Circular Marquee Tool so that half
of the circle will rest on the green field and the other half on the white.

- The selection will be filled with red colour. and a red circle will be viewed
in thumbnail of Layer circle.

C. Preparing Text Layer

- You should keep in mind [Beis ese SERS IE :
that if text is started with TET a
the Type tool, the text will -
automatically be written | | Bare
on the Text layer. The new es
text layer will be | B[ Jaw a
transparent. | mi = EEE EEE

To write on Text Layer:

- Click on the canvas selecting the Type tool from the toolbox, and instantly a
new layer will be added to the Layer Palette.

- Selecting the Text tool. click the mouse pointer on the canvas. and the
requisite dropdown option list will be found on the Option bar to determine
the font, font size, ete.

- Select SutennyMJ from the dropdown list of fonts.

- The size of the font will initially be selected 72 from the dropdown list of
font.

- The font colour will be initially black.

- Type ‘cimig qi, and it will added as a new layer. The letter “T" will be
viewed as a thumbnail of the text layer on layer palette.

- The text can be shifted elsewhere with the Move tool or the mouse pointer.

3 - Now the square, circle, and text can be shifted anywhere with the Move tool.
5


--- Page 96 ---
Information and Communication Technology 91

- If the combined position of the three objects is satisfactory, the file can be
saved for further use.

Transferring Picture from One File to Another

All the pictures should be transferred to a single file to work together. Prepare

an empty file named Default Photoshop Size. Another file called Banana is

opened with the pictures of bananas. Now clicking on a banana with the Move

tool. and drag it to the Window of the empty —

file, The picture of the banana will be shifted to lx ll 2

the empty file. Close the file of Banana. i @

In the same way, more pictures of mangoes. :

pineapples, elc. can be prepared and shifted to 2 [Eres

the new file. na 9

Fixing Target Layer

- The layer in which the picture is edited is called Target Layer.

- Any picture of any layer can be edited whenever required. The picture of a
single layer can be edited once.

To change a layer into Target Layer:

- Click the mouse pointer on the layer, and the layer will be changed into the
Target Layer. The Layer will be viewed and selected then.

Changing the Opacity of the Layer

- Opacity is the intensity of colour. In the opacity text box on the right side
above the Layer palette, 100% is viewed as the full iniensity of colour. If
you put mouse pointer on Opacity, it will be transformed into a
two-pointing arrow. When it will be dragged to the left. the opacity will
decrease, and when it will be dragged to the right, the opacity will increase.

- Or by typing a numerical figure in the opacity textbook the opacity can be
changed.

Removing Layer

Select the Layer to be removed. Then

- Give the Delete Layer command from the pop-up menu of the Layer palette. a

=
E


--- Page 97 ---
92 Multimedia and Graphics
Or

- After selecting the Layer. click the icon of Delete Layer below the palette,
and a dialogne box with a question, ‘Are you sure you want to remove this
Layer?” will come. If you click the *Yes’ button, the layer will be removed.
but if you click ‘No’, the removal process will be stopped.

Combining or Merging Layers

Sometimes it is required to edit all the layers together in Photoshop. After

finishing the task, if it is required to take a print out by a different printing

machine, it should be copied on CD or pen-drive. The size of the file will be
small for getting this task done smoothly. The size of the file will be
comparatively small if the layers can be combined.

To combine layers

- There are three commands called Merge Visible, Flatten Image. and Merge
Down on the pop-up of the Layers palette.

- If any layer 18 invisible, give the command of Merge Visible, and only the
visible layers will be combined.

- If the Merge Down command is given, the selected layer and the layer below
of it will be combined.

- Ifyou choose Flatten Image. all the layers will be combined.

- If there is any invisible layer, an inquiring message will come whether it
will be removed or not. Click the Yes button, and the invisible layers will be
removed and the visible layers will be merged.

Cut, Copy, Paste and Paste into

You may select any object or image either fully or partially, and cut, copy and

paste il. If you paste any object after culling or copying, a new layer is created,

and the object is pasted on the new layer. If any transparent layer is created
before pasting, any cut or copied object can be pasted on the layer.

The Use of Crop Tool

The border of pictures collected \ \

from different sources can not be [8 Ed =

perfect or precise. It can be [§ LT = - “ul

on required to cut off the edges or jd n Gy ¥e
2


--- Page 98 ---
Information and Communication Technology 93
unnecessary parts, In spite of that, the image can also be tilted to one side.
Before starting editing, this kind of problem can be mended. The Crop tool is
used to cut off the unnecessary parts of an image. Crop means cutting off.

- The border of this old picture is uneven, and the first step of editing the
picture will be cropping out the uneven edges. To get it done:

- Select the Crop tool from the toolbox;

- Select the necessary part keeping the uneven parts outside by clicking and
dragging it like the rectangular marquee tool.

- Eight hollow square boxes will be viewed, four on the arms of the selection
and four on the comers. By clicking any one the boxes and dragging it, the
area of the selection can be either reduced or increased.

- After fixing the selection area. press the enter bution of the key board, and
the area outside the selection will be cropped.

- If you think that the crop command should not be given even after selecting,
press the Esc button to undo the effect. Selection can be made again if
required.

Cropping up Tilted Picture

- To crop any tilted picture, the picture is to be opened and the Crop and
Straightened Photo command is to be selected from the sub-menu of
Automate command in File menu. This process 1s applicable only for solid
background. If the background is of multicolor, the work of cropping will be
impossible. In that case

- Select with the crop tool.

- The mouse pointer will be transformed inte a curved pointer or rotate tool.
The selection will be attached with the tilted position of the picture, and the
area of cropping will be finalized with other handles.

- Press the Enter button, and the cropping up of the picture will be done, and
its positioning will be straight.

Use of Eraser Tool

- When any color is erased by the eraser tool, the color is covered with the
color of the canvas. If the color of the canvas is while, it seems that the color

8
=


--- Page 99 ---
94 Multimedia and Graphics
is being erased, but if the color is different, it will be viewed. The picture
on transparent layer will be simply erased.

- Press Cap Lock to erase the minute detail, and the eraser tool will take the
shape of plus (+) sign. The editing of small parts will be done then.

- The work of erasing can be done by selecting a brush. pencil. or block from
the list of Mode drop-down of the Option bar on eraser tool. The rubber
eraser works like an electronic version if a block is selected. The Opacity
options of other tools can be used if they have been selected.

Creating Blend with Gradient Tool

The paint Bucket Tool is kept on the same position of the Gradient Tool. If you

select the Gradient tool, icons of creating five kinds of gradient will be viewed

on the Option bar, for example, Linear Gradient, Radial Gradient, Angle

Gradient, Reflected Gradient and Diamond Gradient.

Blurring of a color [rom the

beginning to the end is called

blend. The color blurs from the

beginning edge to another in

linear blend. On the contrary, in radial blend, the color diffuses either from the

centre to the periphery or the periphery to the centre.

To create linear blend with gradient tool

- A selection of 3 inches width and 2 inches high can be created.

- After selecting (he gradient tool, bring the mouse on the canvas, and it will
be transformed into a plus (+) sign. Now drag it from the lefi-middle of the
selection to the other end, and release the pressure of the finger from the
mouse pointer. It will be viewed that the selection starting with deep black
color gradually diffuses to the end.

-  Ablend can be created from all directions. If anything is not selected, blend
will be created through out the screen.

- Activate the radial gradient icon on the option bar by clicking it for creating
radial gradient.

- The mouse after bringing onto the screen will be transformed into a plus
(+) sign. Now drag it from the middle of the selection to the other end, and

nn 4
o release the pressure of the finger from the mouse pointer.
5


--- Page 100 ---
Information and Communication Technology 95

Editing Gradient

- The editing of gradient can be done by starting, finishing, and changing or
combining colors in the dialogue box. To get the task done

- Gradient Editor Dialogue box can be viewed by clicking on the gradient bar.

- Color Stop triangles can be viewed on ’ gL
the left and the right end of the ===
gradient slider of the gradient editor 7 =
dialogue box. and the Opacity Stop i =
triangles are found on the top of the Ea
same dialogue box. Suppose that the = £
starting color of a linear gradient is $= ~
red and the finishing touch is yellow. : J
To use blue instead of red —

- Click the Color Stop Triangle at the lefl end of the gradient slider. and a color
swatch will be activated at the end. Click the Color swatch and the Select
Stop Color dialogue box will be viewed. Selecting the blue color in this
dialogue box, click the Ok button, and blue will be the Stop Color at the
left-end on the gradient bar. Now drag with gradient tool from one end to
another, and a gradient of a combination blue and yellow will be created.

- Ifyou select the Color Stop at the bottom edge and Opacity Stop on the top
edge of gradient slider, a diamond shaped icon will be viewed in the middle.
This icon indicates the middle point of the gradient from where the color
starts diffusing.

After selecting the middle-point icon, type a position-fixing digit in the
location box to fix the middle. The middle point can be shifted by dragging
the icon either to the left or to the right.

Adding and Removing New Color and Color Stops

If more than two colors are to be used for a gradient, add new Color Stops to the

slider. To do this

- Click anywhere at the bottom of the slider, and new Color Stop will be added
to the diamond for determining color blending middle point. In the same
way, requisite number of Color Stops can be added to the gradient shder.

- If any additional Color Stop is needed to be removed or cropped, click that
color stop icon and drag if to the outside of the slider. and the Color Stop will 2
be removed. ~


--- Page 101 ---
96 Multimedia and Graphics

Adjusting Brightness and Contrast of Picture

Pictures that have been scanned or =

captured by a camera can be indistinct. EE ——

Visibility of color or black and white (= be ®

can not satisfy the expectation level. In = =

that case, increasing the brightness and } on |
combining contrast are required. To 'S -

increase the brightness and contrast  -

- Select the Adjustment command from the Image menu and get a submenu
from where click Brightness/Contrast, and the related dialogue box will be
viewed.

- By moving the triangle of brightness/contrast-slider in the dialogue box
either to the right or to the left. the brightness and contrast can be increased
or reduced.

- If any part of the picture is selected before coming of the dialogue box,
creasing or reducing brightness and contrasting only the selected part can
be done by giving the command.

Activate the Preview check box in the dialogue box by clicking it, and the work

of the changing color can be viewed instantly. If the changed form does not seem

satisfactory, press the Alt button of the keyboard and the Cancel button of the
dialogue box will be changed into a Reset button. Keep pressing the Alt burton
and click the Reset button, and the work previously done will be cancelled.

Hiustrator

Painting with Adobe Tllustrator: Adobe Illustrator is the programme of drawing

pictures, illustrations, making logos and designs. Just as the scope of making

designs with Adobe Photoshop is limited, so is the scope of doing editing work
in Adobe Illustrator. The main job of [llustrator is drawing.

Now, the artists of our country no longer use paint and brush for cover designing

of books. They design covers by using Adobe Illustrator. Invitation cards.

advertisements, posters, bammers, bill-boards, etc. cannot be made without the
illustrator.

There are plenty of programmes in a computer for making designs. but the

” lustrator is popular for its facilities and varieties. That is why Illustrator is used
g throughout the world.


--- Page 102 ---
Information and Communication Technology 97

Apart from writing in the Illustrator programme by using a keyboard, writing is

possible as an artist does by using brush. The font size and shape can be changed

as required.

Like other programmes. open Illustrator and start making new files.

Open Illustrator Programme

To open Illustrator programme

1. Amenu will be viewed when you will click on the Start button at the left end
of the screen with the mouse pointer.

2. You will get a fly out menu placing the mouse pointer on All Programmes
in this menu.

3. By clicking Adobe Master Collection menu in this menu, you will get
another fly out menu. You will get the list of programmes of Adobe in this
meni

4. Tf you click on Adobe Illustrator from the list, the programme will open.

To Open File in Hustrator

- Select the New command from the File menu or press Ctrl N, and a New
dialogue box will be viewed. In the New dialogue box

- Type a name in the Name dialogue oy —
box, for example. Ankon-1. Any | ses we: =
name can be used instead of this NE wae] | EE
one. A name which is easy to CC ETT
remember or compatible with the Spee
subject can be given. Finding out the Cnr @nmceor
file will be easier later on.

- -Adetailed drop-down list will be viewed by clicking the drop-down arrow of
the size-box. Different sizes of the paper will be viewed here. The size of
paper which is required should be selected by name, and the height and
width of the paper will be seen in the box.

- The units of measurement are found in Units box. The users of our country
are familiar with the measurement of inches, but points, picas, millimetres,
centimetres, pixel, etc. can be used to work more precisely. Click the
drop-down arrow in the unit box. and a detailed drop-down list will be
visible. The requisite unit of measurement can be fixed from this list. “

- Pictures of two people are viewed on the right of Onentation. If you click 5

Forma-13, ICT(9-10)


--- Page 103 ---
98 Multimedia and Graphics
the first one, the position of paper will be portrait, and it will be in
landscape position if the second one is clicked.

- Two options are shown as RGB and CMYK in Color Mode. CMYK mode is
suitable for printing work. but RGB mode is better for electronic medium.
However, on the computer screen, the difference of these modes are not
precisely distinguished.

- Fixing the measurement. press OK in the dialogue box. and it will
disappear. A new window will come.

In the Name box of the New dialogue box, type a file name, and it will be viewed

on the title bar at the right side of Adobe Illustrator above the menu bar. If any

file name is not typed ‘Untitled ..." will be viewed on the title bar.

Work Tools

New vacant files will be found on the screen after creating a new file. Numerous

objects like menu bar. toolbox, floating palette, scroll bar, ste. will be viewed for

starting work.

Title Bar

After opening the Tlustrator JI== Si SselEtr Sorisans on SHG 1

Programme, on the lefi-end above c= pere——

the screen, the other information of | [2 © spe =

the document with the name of ||% 2

application on the title bar may be [|= ==

viewed, for example, Adobe Any

Tustrator-[Ankon-1 ~~ @ 70 | 45 m—

(RGB/Preview)]. Here, Adobe is i]

Illustrator is the name of d i

application, Ankon-1 is the name | == Telell |:

of file if this name was given

during 1s creation, and @ 70

(CMYK/Preview) is the size of visible area and presentation of color mode. The

entire part stretching to the right is the title bar.

- If any name is not given during opening a file. it can be given after
completing and saving the work too. Files are given different names, and
when a file is opened, its name is viewed on the title bar to the right of the

“ application.
8


--- Page 104 ---
Information and Communication Technology 99
Different kinds of tools and options for designing and drawing are arranged in
Toolbox & Palette. Designing and drawing can be done by using these tools
and options, and editing work is possible to get the image in its expected form.
Names of the Necessary Tools of the Toolbox
Names of the necessary tools should be known before starting work. Ellipse,
polygon. star, and spiral tools stay on the linear position in the toolbox. These are
called "Group Tools”. A Right-angeled triangle is attached with these tools. If a
triangle sign is attached with the tool, it means that more tools are kept in the
same position. If you click the visible tool in the box and continue pressing the
mouse, all the tools will be viewed together. Drag the mouse pointer on the
required tool and click, and the tool will be visible in the toolbox.
There are some icons in the swatch below the tools in the toolbox. Imposing
color in an object or on the edges of an object or cancelling a command can be
done with these icons. Create an object to understand the use of the icons, To
make an object like this—
Toggle column —» CEE
(v) Selection Tool [i] & | Direct Selection (A)
()magic wand K §3 | Lasso (Q)
®P)Pen  § T, Type
ruling Segment [Gl Rectangle (M)
(e)yPaintbrush #7 oF, Pencil (N)
(R)Rotate ©) EJ Scale (Ss)
shift + Rywap ELEY Free Transform (E)
(Shitt+5) Symbol Sprayer "Blu, Column Graph ())
(U)Mesh gl (W Gradient (6)
()eyedropper FX, 9, Blend
(K) Live Paint Bucket $4 ® Live Paint Selection (Shift + 1)
(Shift + 0) Crop Area 35, &, Eraser {Shift+E)
(Hand $9. A zoom in)
DX) Toggle fil le tt Swap fill/strake (SPILX)
(D) Datauit fill stroke —= 3 [lasl<—— Toggle Stroke (X)
(<) Color 8 Ze— None (/)
(>) Gradient 3 -
Change sreen moda (F) 5
=


--- Page 105 ---
100 Multimedia and Graphics

- Click the rectangle tool with the mouse pointer, and the tool will be selected.

- Bringing the mouse pointer inside the screen, and after clicking elsewhere
drag diagonally right below for an inch, and release the finger pressure
from the mouse. A rectangle or square object will be created.

- The object will be selected and filled with a color.

- Four hollow boxes will be viewed on the four corners of the selected
object. Four small solid boxes will be viewed on the four corners.

- If the object becomes free [rom the selection, click Direct Selection Tool in
the toolbox with the mouse pointer, and the Direct Selection Tool will be
selected. Now bringing the mouse pointer inside the screen, click the object
with Direct Selection Tool, and the object will be selected. In this situation,
again click the Selection Tool, and four solid boxes can be viewed on the
arms along wiih four solid boxes on the corners.

Filling Color on Object

Fill and Stroke

- The edge or border of an object is
called ‘Stroke’ and the internal part is NEY
called the Fill". The use of the “Fill*| | 7
and ‘Stroke’ swatch is related to the | | <a
color palette. Tf the color palette is not z 2
viewed on the screen, either give the a nr
Color command from window menu or 2 =
press the Fé button, and the color re =
palette will be visible. Click the Fill | [73 7 |(IS=58 —
swatch and it will be activated and | [oa |||Gl i= =
viewed above. Thus only the work of [I]
filling can be done. Only an object can | e—
be filled, not the stroke. Similarly, | [==9
clicking the Stroke swalch, activate it
and stay over the Fill swatch. Thus, color can be imposed on the strokes of
object. It will be impossible to fill object with color from here.

- When the Fill swatch is active, click on the colour of Color Spectrum Bar of
the color palette. The side of the selected object will be filled with that
color. Similarly, when the stroke swatch is active and the color that will be
clicked on the Color Spectrum Bar, the strokes of the objects will be filled

8 with that color. The color mside the object will remain unchanged.


--- Page 106 ---
Information and Communication Technology 101

- Stokes can be thick for a clear view. For having this effect, select the stroke
command from the Window menu. and Stroke palette will be viewed on the
screen. Select at least 10 from the weight drop-down menu in the Stroke
palette. In this stage, if color is imposed or changed. it will be clearly visible.

Color, Gradient, and None

Color, Gradient and None are the three icons respectively 3 Q

below the Fill and Stroke swatch. Clicking Color and EY

Gradient icon separately, activate the Color and Gradient

palette. Click the None icon, and the fill of selected object or [J]

the color of stoke can be inactive or cancelled. If an object is un m2

filled with color or gradient, the color will be viewed. If the E

object is selected, the color will be changed as well. 5900

Increasing and Reducing the Size of Object

Many minute jobs are done to create object. Doing these minute jobs may be

troublesome in the usual size of the object. If a specific part of the object is

enlarged. it [acilitates the task. Viewing a page in an increased size while
working in Tllustrator is called Zoom in, and in decreased size is Zoom out,

Object will also be viewed either big or small with increasing or decreasing size.

To view an object big or small, the visible size of the page will be made big or

small by using Zoom Tool. To get the job done

- The Zoom Tool will be selected, if it is clicked in DTD, me
the Zoom Tool box. yd b-

- After selecting the Zoom Tool, if the mouse = =
pointer is brought on the screen, it will look like a <M Q
flint-glass, and a plus (+) sign will be visible in — =
the glass,

- The size of the screen will be bigger when clicked with the Zoom Tool on
screen. With the increasing size of the screen, the object will remain on the
screen enlarged. If it becomes enormously enlarged, some objects will not be
viewed on the screen. Clicking on the screen and dragging with the
hand-tool, that part can be brought on the screen.

- Press the Alt bution while the Zoom Tool is active, and the Zoom Tool will
be transformed into the Zoom Out Tool. Keep pressing the Alt button and
continue clicking with the Zoom Out Tool, the size of the screen will
gradually become smaller.

- Press Ctrl - or Ctrl = button to complete the work of Zoom out and 5
Zoom in. ~


--- Page 107 ---
102 Multimedia and Graphics

Changing the Positioning of Page By Hand Tool

If the size of the page is made smaller or bigger, the necessary part of the object

can go outside the visible area. In this case, to shift the object to a suitable place

on the screen

- Select the Hand Tool by clicking on it in the Hand Tool Box.

- Click on the necessary object with the Hand Tool, dragging it to a suitable
place, and release the pressure of the finger on the mouse.

In this way, the positioning of the original page can be changed. The object

that has been clicked will not be shifted in a different way.

Mode of Viewing Object

There are some modes to view objects in the Illustrator programme. Any of these

can be selected from the View menu as required.

- In Outline Mode, the object is viewed as an outline or in a linear shape. In
this mode, editing of the shape or structure of the object, particularly a
detailed editing of a line or path can easily be done.

- The object is viewed perfectly in Pixel Preview or Preview mode.

- The image viewed in Overprint Preview Mode can be printed out.

Creating Object

In the preparatory stage of creating objects, the elementary process of making

different kinds of shapes should be learnt, for example, squares, rectangulars,

circulars, and elliptic, multi-angular, starry, and spiral shapes. To create an object

- The Rectangle Tool will be selected if clicked with the mouse pointer.

- After bringing the mouse pointer inside the screen and clicking anywhere,
drag diagonally below an inch and release the pressure on the mouse. A
square or rectangular object will be created.

In the same process, select another object tool from the Tool box and make other

objects. No object can be created only once. By erasing the object partially or

fully, we can start in a new way. To get the task done, it is required to learn how
to erase the entire object or part of the object.

Selecting Object and Erasing Borderline or Path

- Ifthe object is filled with color, the object will be selected if clicked with the
Selection Tool or Direct Selection Tool. Keep pressing the Alt button and
click on the path of the object. The entire object will be selected.

- To erase the path of the object or the part of the path, select them with either

i the Selection Tool or Direct Selection Tool. Press Backspace or Delete
8 button, and the Path or the part will be deleted.


--- Page 108 ---
Information and Communication Technology 103
If the Backspace or Delete button is pressed, the object is erased. Select the Cut
command from the Edit menu, and the object goes to a temporary memory called
clipboard and stays there until another object is cut or copied. When an object
stays on the clipboard, selecting the paste command from the Edit menu will
restore the object to the document.

Path

The path of the object can be formed with more than one segment. A single

segment can also be used if necessary. The border of the object is called Path.

A straight line is called Path too.

Selection Tool

- The selection Tool, Direct Selection Tool or Group Selection Tool can be
used to select either the entire object or a part of an object.

- The selection tool is called the Black Arrow. Click the Selection Tool with
the mouse pointer for using the tool, and it will be selected. If the mouse
pointer is brought on the screen after selecting the tool, the mouse pointer
takes the shape of a black arrow or selection tool. Click on the object and it
will be selected. Selection Tool is also used to select the entire object.

- If any object is selected with the Selection Tool, rectangular, circular or
hounding box is created around the object. Four hollow boxes on four
corners and four on the four arms will be visible. These boxes are called
Resize Box. Clicking and dragging on the resizing boxes, the size of the
object can be enlarged and reduced. Keep pressing shift and drag, and the
object will be bigger or smaller according to proportion.

- Clicking the centre of the selected object with the Selection Tool or on any of
the arms or any part of the object and dragging, it will be shifted to anywhere.

For selecting more than one object together

- After selecting the first object. keep pressing the shift button and select the
next object. Tn this way. select as many objects as required. When all the
objects are selected only one bounding box will square them.

- By clicking and dragging the resize box of the bounding box, all the objects
will be enlarged and shortened together.

- Click the mouse pointer on an empty space on the screen. the object will be
selection-free. If any particular object requires to be selection free from
numerous selected objects, click the object while pressing the Shift burton.

Direct Selection Tool

The white tool on the right of the Selection tool is called the Direct Selection

Tool. This tool is called the White Arrow. =


--- Page 109 ---
104 Multimedia and Graphics
The Direct Selection Tool or the White Tool is used to select the segment of the
object or the entire object. A part of the object can separately be enlarged or
shortened by selecting any anchor point of the object with the Direct Selection
Tool.
Grouping Object
Ta create a group of objects
A. Select either all or requisite objects.
B. The selected objects will be grouped, if the Group command is given from
the Object menu.
Clicking on a blank space, make all the objects selection-free, and then click any
object with the black arrow or the selection tool, and a rectangular bounding box
will be created around the grouped objects. Thus the objects inside the selection
box will be selected together.
To make the grouped objects ungrouped:
A. Click an object. and the grouped objects will be selected.
B. Give the Ungroup command from the Object menu, and the grouped objects
will be ungrouped.

Lock the Objects
‘While working with more than one object, it is required to keep one or more
than objects locked. As a locked object can not be selected, the editing work can
not be done. So the locked object can not be changed by mistake.
To lock an object:
A. Select a particular object.
B. Give the Lock command from the Object menu.
If it 1s required to edit or change a locked object, unlock it. To unlock an object
select the “Unlock All’ command from the object menu. Thus all the objects will
be unlocked. An unlocked object can be edited in the usual way.
Use of Cut, Copy and Paste Command
After selecting any abject with the selection tool and giving the Cut command
from the Edit menu. the object will disappear and it will be copied if the Copy
command is given. Any cut and copied object is stored on the clipboard, and if
Paste command is given from the Edit menu. the object will be pasted on the
screen. The object can be shifted elsewhere by dragging it with the selection
took.

i If any object is dragged while Pressing the All bution of the keyboard, it is

= shifted after a copy is created.


--- Page 110 ---
Information and Communication Technology 105
Give the Paste in Front command, and the object will be placed above the
existing object.

Give the Paste in Back command. and the copied object will be placed below the

existing object.

Layer

Layer means step. In this process. editing can be done while keeping different

objects on different steps. This layer or step can be compared to transparent glass

or polythene. If three objects or pictures are created on three glasses or
transparent media and placed on the other, three objects will be viewed. These
three glasses or media are regarded as layers.

The facilities of working in the layer process are as follows:

«Arranging steps among the Layers;

e keeping more than one layer invisible;

eo keeping layers locked,

eo Adding a new layer. removing unnecessary layers. etc.

Creating New Layers

If Layer palette is not viewed on the sereen, give the Layer command from the

Window menu, and the layer palette will be viewed. At the beginning, only one

layer will be on the palette. After finishing the work of a layer. add a new layer

on the palette to create new object. To add a new layer

A. A new layer will be added on the layer palette when you click the Create
New Layer icon below the row of Layer Palette.

B. If any layer numbered serially needs to be identified with a particular
name, double-click the layer and a dialogue box called Layer Options will
be viewed. Type the necessary name on the Name box, and click the Ok
button. The serial number or name of the concerned Layer (if the name was
previously given) will be changed into the name typed in the dialogue box.

Cancelling Layer

A. By selecting the Layer and the Delete command from the pop-up menu on
the layer palette, the selected layer will be cancelled.

- In the process of deleting a layer of artwork or an object. a cautionary
message like ‘Delete Layer?” will be viewed. Click the ‘Ok’ button. and the
layer will be deleted. Click the “No” button, and the deleting process will be
stopped. But by clicking and dragging the layer, on to the Delete icon, no
such message will be viewed. o

BS

Forma-14, ICT-(9-10)


--- Page 111 ---
106 Multimedia and Graphics

Merging Layers

After creating and editing objects of two or more layers, they can be merged

together. To get the job done:

A. Select the layers.

B. Select the ‘Merge Selected” command from the pop-up menu of the layer
palette, and the layers will be merged.

Use of Color in Object

After creating an object, fill in the color as required. The color palette, color bar,

or color spectrum bar, gradient, ete. are used to fill color in the object.

Color Palette

If the color palette is not viewed on the screen, give the color command of the

‘Window menu, and the color palette will appear.

- On the left above the Color Palette, an =
indicator box of Fill and Stroke or | — BE J]
Swatch is found. Color Slider and Color | | #6 "Saleh 5 [0]
Spectrum Bar are found below it. If the LJ « — wm |
work is done on gray scale mode, only = —
one color slider will be viewed. If the G E— 0 |
work 18 done on RGB = Red Green Blue —
mode, 3 color sliders will be viewed, and he lee |
if’ the work is done on CMYK mode, 4
color sliders will be viewed.

Fill Color

To fill color in any object: re 8

A. Select the object. [7 ee T=]

B. Click the Fill Indicator box of the | —— Cl
Color Palette, activate it. The  —
activated Fill Swatch will stay
above the Stroke icon.

C. Click the requisite color in Color Spectrum Bar.

- The selected object will be filled with the color in Color Spectrum Bar. On
the extreme right of the Color Spectrum Bar, a Swatch of black and white
color will be found. If the black swatch is clicked, the object will be filled
entirely with a black color, and if the white swatch is clicked, the object will

gq be filled entirely with a white color.
Ld


--- Page 112 ---
Information and Communication Technology 107

The Use of Stroke

The border of object is called Path. The measurement of making a path thick or

thin is called Stroke. Objects of grouped and ungrouped path, straight. curved

lines, ete. are controlled by Stroke. Controlling strokes means to make a path
thick or thin and colored. Making a Stroke thick and thin can be done with the

Stroke Palette. To get the job done

A. Select the object or path. If the Stroke Palette is not viewed on the screen,
click the Stroke command from the Window menu, and the Stroke Palette
will be viewed.

B. When the object or path remains selected, click the downward arrow of the
Weight box in Stroke Palette and keep pressing the mouse, many
measurenient units will be shown in the dropdown list. Select a number from
the list as required. If a small number is selected, the stroke will be thin, and
if a large number is selected, the stroke will be thick.

C. A measurement unit can be typed TR
directly in the Weight box, if eign SIEH|
required. The fraction of a number wema@l |» BES
can be used too. The thickness and erst RD
thinness can be determined from [Rete i
0-1000 points.

Pen and Pencil Tool

The main reason of the Illustrator programme being popular is the use of Pen

Tool. It is possible to make complex and very small design and do the editing

work with the Pen Tool.

Two anchor points are found at the two ends of a path or line. The first anchor

point is called the starting point and the second anchor point is called end point.

There is a controlling handle with the anchor points of curved path and a

control point outside the control handle, By clicking and dragging the control

point, the curve of a line can be controlled. The anchor point, control handle, and
control point are not viewed in the print out.

The Pencil Tool is another form of the Pen —

Tool. Curve lines can be made by

dragging the Pencil Tool. - a

The Pen Tool is the main lool for drawing A of

vector objects. A subtle object can be hp

created by a keen path with he help of the 2 a

Pen Tool. 8


--- Page 113 ---
108 Multimedia and Graphics

Closed Path and Opened Path

A closed Path has no beginning and no closing point, as in a circle and square,

ele. A closed path may have curved ends. On the contrary, an Open Path has a

begining and a closing end.

Pencil Tool and Pen Tool

A Path can be created easily with the Pencil Tool. By selecting the pencil tool

from the tool box. and clicking and dragging it on the screen path, a drawing

curved line is possible. The function of the pencil tool is like making a sketch on

the paper. On the contrary, a path is created with the Pen Tool by clicking and

dragging. To make a path with the Pen Tool

A. Select the pen tool from the toolbox. Click anywhere on the screen and
release the pressure of your finger from the mouse.

B. Click a little bit above lor the second time and release the pressure of the
finger from the mouse.

C. Click on the right below from the place where you have clicked for the
second time.

D. Click above the right a bit, and drag rightward.

E. Click on the right a bit below, and click again on the right from the position
of next, moving a bit rightward from the previous click.

F. Clicking on the right above and drag further right from this position

G. Click on the right below.

A wave-like open path object can be created in this way.

Editing Path

A path cannot be created according to the expectation at the first attempt. After

creating the path, give it the expected shape through editing. By editing the path,

new anchor points can be added, and it can be removed if required or Cropped

up or the two separated parts can be connected too. In this way, a change can be

made as many times as required.

Adding Anchor Point —t AN

To add an anchor point at any point of the path: A fi \ i

A. Select the Add Anchor Point Tool from | / ul IS \ ’
toolbox, and bring the mouse pointer
inside the screen, a plus sign (+) will be found on the right below the Pen Tool.

B. Click any place of the path with the Anchor Tool Point, and a new anchor
point will be set on that point.

a - The new anchor point added on the straight path is called a Straight Comer
~ Anchor Point and on the curved path is called a Smooth Anchor Point.


--- Page 114 ---
Information and Communication Technology 109

Removing Anchor Point

To remove any anchor point on the path:

A. Select the Delete Anchor Point Tool. After selecting the tool, bring mouse

pointer inside the screen, and a minus sign (-) will be viewed below the Pen Tool.

B. If you click any anchor point with the Delete Anchor Point Tool, that anchor

point will be deleted.

Editing Curve Path

A circle/rectangular object or a design will be created with the pen/pencil tool

for editing path. To edit curve:

A. Selecting the Direct Selection Tool and after clicking an anchor point. drag
and shift its position, and the curve and shape of the anchor will be changed.

B. Click an anchor point. and the handle of it will be viewed. Clicking and
dragging the control point of any end of the handle, the part of the path
related with the anchor point, and the curve can be reduced or increased. The
direction can be changed too.

After creating open path with the Pencil or Pen Tool, the strokes can be thick or

thin, and filled with color. After creating closed paths with the Pencil or Pen

Tool, it can be filled with any color.

Writing Job

Writing is mandatory for the covers of books, magazines, posters,

advertisements. cards, etc. The Type Tool is used for writing in Llustrator, Six

kinds of Type Tools are found in Illustrator. Arrangement of writing can be done

in three ways with these Type Tools. for example, Point Text. Area Text and Path

Text.

Point Text

In the Point Text process, the way of typing is very easy. To type in this process:

A. Select the Type Tool from the toolbox.

B. Click any blank space of the screen.

C. Change the keyboard into Bangla for typing in Bangla.

D. Click “Character” in ribbon on the screen, and the Character Palette will be
viewed. Select the font from the Font Pop-up menu of the Character Palette.

E. Start typing following the rules of word processing. Click any letter with
the Selection Tool. and a line will be viewed below it. This line is called
‘Baseline’.

Editing Writing -

The requisite commands will be found in the Type menu and in the Character

Palette.


--- Page 115 ---
110 Multimedia and Graphics

Select the Character from the Type command of the Window menu. or press Ctrl

T, and the Character Palette will be viewed floating on the screen. When it is

floating, it can be used as required.

Selecting Letters —

Letters, and words can be selected according to the |*<##A<= AGRA =|

rules of word processing while the Type Tool | Sf=mrofesder z

is selected. Click with Direct Selection Tool in ee —

the writing, the entire typed part i.e. the entire | = =e = #5 Eoso ~

writing with the baseline will be selected. In this Mio msc  -

case, the letters will not be highlighted. The | 2 w= ~ IT: se ~

baseline under the letters will not be viewed. ee CEE

Changing Color of Letters Zh eS

To change the color of the letters: i Be

A.The requisite letters or writings should be selected.

B. Click on the color on the bar of the Color Palette or Swatch Palette. The
selected letters or words will assume the color.

Deleting Letters

A letter or letters or a paragraph or the entire writing can be deleted by pressing

the Backspace/Delete button. if it is selected.

Enlarging or Reducing Font Size

A. Click the downward arrow on the right side of Font Size box in the Character
Palette as the letter or letters are selected and keep pressing the mouse, and a
list of measuring numbers about the Font Size will be viewed. Continue
pressing the mouse and take on a measurement number, and the number will
be selected. Afier giving the command, release the pressure on the mouse
and the size of the selected letters will either be enlarged or reduced.

B. If the requisite measurement number is not found in the drop-down menu,
place insertion pointer in Font Size box by clicking directly.

- By pressing the Backspace button, delete the existing measurement number
and type new number.

- Press Enter button and he selected letter or letters will either be enlarged or
reduced according to the measurement number.

Increasing or Decreasing Font Size Vertically and Horizontally

To get the job done:

A. Click the drop-down arrow on the right of Vertical Scale and keep the

A] pressure on the mouse to get the list of measurement numbers. If a number
X


--- Page 116 ---
Information and Communication Technology 111
bigger than 100% is selected, keep the pressure on the mouse and drag. The
font size will be vertically big. On the contrary, if a number smaller than
100% is typed, the font size will be vertically small. 100% is the ideal
measurement of letter.

To increase or decrease fonts horizontally:

B. Clicking the drop-down arrow on the right of Horizontal Scale and keeping
pressure on the mouse to get the list of measurement number. If a number
bigger than 100% is selected, keep continuing the pressure on the mouse and
keep dragging. The font size will be horizontally big. On the contrary, if a
number smaller than 100% is typed, the font size will be horizontally small.
100% is the ideal measurement of letter.

Baseline Shift

If any text written with the Direct Selection Tool is selected, the line seen below

ihe text is called the Baseline. Shifting the lower edge of the text up or down is

called Baseline Shift.

Selecting the measurement number from the drop-down menu in ‘Set the

Baseline Shift box" of the Character palette, or typing measurement number

directly in the Set the Baseline Shift box, the measurement of Baseline Shift

should be fixed. The use of a negative number will take the text below the
baseline, and conversely an positive number will bring the text above the
baseline.

The Leading

The space between the lines is called the ‘Leading’ which can be required for

the text containing many lines.

A. By selecting a measurement number from the drop-down menu in Set the
Leading box of the Character palette. or typing the measurement number
directly in the Set the Leading box. and pressing the Enter, the Leading will
be activated.

B. If the upward arrow button of Set the Leading box is pressed, the
measurement of the Leading will increase, and if the downward arrow button
is pressed. the measurement of the Leading will decrease.

Area Text

Any text typed or placed in square, rectangular, TEI CCT RI

circular, elliptical or any closed path is called Area [aadahsahasahibl

Text. To type or arrange text in a closed path: Mish il Shiu

A. Create a square, rectangular, circular or Tp FE A | TA
elliptical path, OC GR (EE HA

FR AT AT BL I i

B. After selecting the Type Tool, place the Eis 2

mouse pointer on the closed path. the Type


--- Page 117 ---
112 Multimedia and Graphics
Tool will take the shape of the Area Type Tool.

C. Click on the anchor point of the path, and the insertion point will be placed
inside the closed path, which will be used as a Text Box or Text Container.

D. Start the work of typing.

E. When you will reach the right edge of a line, the insertion pointer will
automatically go down the next line. If typing continues in this way, the
next line will be automatically started.

Typing in the Path

Typing inside and outside the closed path, and below and above the open path

can be done with the Path Type Tool of Illustrator. Typing inside and outside a

circular object like making a monogram can be done.

Typing outside Circular Objeet

A. Make a circular object, and if itis filled with color, click the None icon either
of the Color Palette or Tool Box to delete the color of the circle.

B. Select the Type on a Path Tool from the Tool Box
as the circle is selected. Click the anchor point of &° Le on
this circle with the tool, and the msertion point will £ Ey
be placed outside the Path of the circle. i A

- The circle must be selected while clicking. If it is § 3
not selected. step | and step 2 should be completed
after the selection.

C. IF typing is started, the text will advance following the path of the circle
usually from left to right. In the same way, the text will be arranged outside
rectangular object if required.

D. Click the text with the Direct Selection Tool and the Eyebeam between the
Path and the text will be selected.

E. By clicking the edge above or below the Eyebeam and dragging it in a
circular way the text can be shifted elsewhere.

Arranging Writing in Open Path

A. An Open Path can be created with the Pencil or Pen Tool.

B. Click on the selected Path with the Path Tool, and the insertion pointer will
be placed on the Path.

C. Type following the usual rule. PLL &

- The Path and the Text will be selected | 4 pS

4g if the text is clicked with the Direct
H


--- Page 118 ---
Information and Communication Technology 113
Selection Tool, and the text can be shifted elsewhere by clicking and dragging
the Eyebeam while selected.

- The Path will be selected if clicked with the Direct Selection Tool, and the
anchor point of the Path will be viewed. Now the Path can be edited
following the rules of editing, If the Path is made curve, the text will follow
the line.

- If the Path is smaller than the text, any additional text will not be viewed.
‘When the Path will be extended, the rest of the text will be viewed,

Creating Outline of Letters

‘When the outline of letters is created, the edges of the letters will be transformed

into a Path. By clicking and dragging the Path and Anchor point, the shapes of

the letters can be changed. A

To create the outline of letters: | LG i ’ i] wes

A. Select one or more than one letter | {| cv |
or word.

B. Give the Create Outline command from the Type menu or press Shift Ctrl O,
and selected text will be transformed into the Outline.

‘When the letters will be transformed into the Outline, the text will be changed

into graphics. The shape of the letters can be changed following the rules of

editing a Path, filling color and adding gradient.

Placement of Image in Hlustrator

To place an image in illustrator:

A. Give the Place command from the File menu and a Place dialogue box will come.

B. Select the required file from the Place dialogue box.

- It should be known in which folder and under what name the file has been saved. The
required file will be selected after opening the specific folder.

C. Click the Place button in the dialogue box, and the image of the selected file will be viewed
on the screen.

- Across sign will be viewed on the image when the image of the Photoshop is placed in the
Illustrator. Click outside and the cross-sign will be removed. Click the image with the
Selection Tool, and the image will be selected and four resize boxes on the four arms and
on the four angles will be viewed. By clicking and dragging the resize boxes, the images
can either be enlarged or reduced,

Group work
+ Edit any image using Photoshop.
+ Draw a monogram for any school in Tllustrator.
Because of (he version of software there may be difference in title and menu bar. 4
BS
Forma-15, ICT(9-10)


--- Page 119 ---
114 Multimedia and Graphics
Exercise
1. How many forms of media are combined in multimedia?
Al B. 2
Cc. 3 D. 4
2. In which work is multimedia used?
A. For preparing an examination result; B. For calculating shopping expenditure;
C. For preparing a scoresheet of cricket; D. For making an animation film;
3. Which one is a multimedia Software?
A. Microsoft Work B. Microsoft Powerpoint
C. Microsoft Excel D. Microsoft Access
4. Application of Multimedia —
i. has made the presentation of text impressive;
i. has made the work of printing and publication easy;
iii. has made the keeping of accounts easy;
‘Which one is correct?
A idl B. 1&1
C. ii &iii D. iii & iii
Read the chapter below, and answer the question nos. 5 & 6:
Mr. Rakib is the chief executive of a renowned company. A foreign delegate
will come to visit his company tomorrow. He has made a presentation in his
laptop and he will show it to them. He took the help of a piece of Software for
the presentation.
5. Which Software is suitable for Mr. Rakib for his representation?
A. Microsoft Word B. Microsoft Powerpoint
C. Microsoft Excel D. Microsoft Access
6. The Software which is used by Mr. Rakib—
i. will make the presentation impressive by using animation.
il. will show the activities of the company by using sound and video.
iii. will prepare the accounts of his company.
Which one is correct?
A i&il B. 1&1
C. ii &iii D. iii &iil
7. Explain the importance of Presentation Software to present anything,
«8 ‘The present publication industry is completely dependent on Graphics
5 Softw, pod ry with tinal P ver P


--- Page 120 ---
Sixth Chapter
Problem Solving through Programming
After completing this chapter, we will be able to........
# understand problem-solving;
7 learn about programming languages;
» code using the Python programming language?
3 solve common problems using the Python programming language.
Programming in problem solving
In real life, we encounter various types of problems. We need 10 solve these
problems to move forward. Problem-solving is the process of identifying chal-
lenges or obstacles to understand the nature of the problem and find ways to
overcome it. This involves analyzing the surrounding circumstances, thinking
critically, and discovering possible solutions to the problem. This process typi-
cally includes defining the problem, considering potential solutions, evaluating
those alternative solutions, and then implementing the best solution.
&
$ Ect em
Java
iC oc |
G+ # python
un
wad GC 0
i] | S— PROLRAMNINEG
| A JavaScript aoa

Programming Language
We use various languages to express our thoughts, such as Bengali, English,
French, Latin, Spanish, etc. However, a computer cannot directly understand
these languages. To give any instructions to a computer, we need to write them
in a language that the computer can understand. Computers and any electronic
devices can only understand 0 and 1. Bi


--- Page 121 ---
116 Information and Communication Technology
But writing our instructions using only 0 and 1 is challenging for us. The
languages we humans typically use are not composed solely of 0s and 1s.
So, how can we communicate with computers? There are certain languag-
es where, by following specific rules, we can write structions that the
computer can easily convert into a form it understands. These languages
are known as programming languages. There are many types of program-
ming languages, such as C, C++, Python, Java, and so on.

By learning any programming language, we can give various instructions

to the computer as needed using that language. In a software application

on our computer, we will first write the instructions in a specific program-
ming language. The computer has a translation system that converts these
programming language instructions into machine code.
HELLO 010110
——(=3
oo {TRANSLATOR }
i

‘What is machine code or machine langnage?

Machine code or machine language is essentially a binary code made up of 0 and

1, which our computer can directly understand. Therefore, the task of translating

between programming languages and machine code is done with the help of a

type of program called a translator. By converting instructions into machine

code through a translator, the computer can understand our commands and com-
plete the specified tasks accordingly.

The translation system or translator program in a computer for programming

languages can be of two types:

a) Compiler: In some translation systems, if all the instructions we give are
correct, they will be converted into machine code all at once. This translation
process is called compiling, and the software that performs this translation is

g known as a compiler.
a


--- Page 122 ---
Problem Solving through Programming 117
However, if the compiler finds any errors in the entire set of instructions, it
cannot proceed with the translation. Only when all instructions are error-free
can the compiler perform the translation.

progeanming ==
[eis Compller Machine Code

b) Interpreter: In some translation systems, regardless of the number of instru
ctions we give, they will not be translated all at once. Instead, each instruc-
tion will be translated sequentially, one by one. This translation process is
called interpreting, and the program that performs this translation is called an
interpreter. The interpreter translates each instruction one at a time and will
stop if it encounters an error in any instruction.

5 =H
@»> 5 B|>
sa) Compiler Machine Code
TE Go to The Next a
Command

Which Programming Language to Learn?

To start, learning any one of the commonly used programming languages is

enough. This is because the basic structure of all programming languages is sim-

ilar, with only slight differences in the way instructions are written. For exam-
ple, in the C programming language, each statement must end with a semicolon.
but in Python, this is not necessary. Though there are some differences, there's
no need to worry. Once you learn one programming language, it becomes much
easier to learn others, Generally, the choice of a programming language depends 3
3


--- Page 123 ---
118 Information and Communication Technology
on the type of work and to some extent on personal interest. For those new to
programming, Python can be an excellent starting point. Python is a fun and
beginner-friendly programming language "
with simple syntax, and it is widely used in { h 0 n
fields like web development, data
science.and automation,

Starting, the Journey of Programming in Python:
To write instructions or code in Python, we need to perform some tasks to set up
the programming environment:
1. We need to download the Python application and install it on our computer,
Python can be downloaded from this link.
https://www.python.org/downloads/
Afterthat, we download the latest version from there.
2. Once the application is downloaded, we proceed to stall it. During the
installation, we will see a window like the one below:
oT) - =
Install Pythan 3.12.7 (64-bit)
frenetic nior a
PYLON (i ce se es ig pi
WIRIBS [Spe —— Cave
Click the options at the bottom of the installation window and check the boxes.
Then, Iwill click on the Install Now option. If it asks for permission to install, [
will grant that permission as well.
3. After that, we will sce a message indicating that our setup was successful.
4. Python is now added to our computer. However, we will need another soft-
ware application where we can write our instructions and communicate
them to the computer. For that. let’s go to this link: https://www.thonmy.org/:
from this link, we can download and install the thonny software.
on
3
2
5


--- Page 124 ---
Problem Solving through Programming 119
me Welcome to using Thanay!
Ter EIEN
EE
aera
ar
[a
5. Afterthat, open the Thonny software. We will see a window like the one
below.
’ - [=] x
Umgusge [nga 00) [deta] ~
Rap—
Lets got
When clicking the button, Let's go! a window like the one below will appear.
Th Thoomy  vumtieds © 111 - 0 x
Fe Bde Vem Rum Tok belp
134 0% LL
1
shes
Lod Byte + Tsay’ Bihan &
a
2


--- Page 125 ---
120 Information and Communication Technology

6. Let’s understand a few important sections in this window.

Boy id 0111 -— 0 «x
he Ge Vow Mam ooh Help
JE I © =

To see the output, click here

To save the programme, click here

Here goes the programme name

(Space to write cods)
het
re Here the output of the code is shown
eT

7. Now let's write a programme which will print Hello World! as the output.
The print() function is used to print something as an output. The text we
want to print should be written within the print() function with ' ' (single
quotation). So, to print Hello World! we have to write:

print (" Hello World! ")

Now clicking the ‘Run’ button will show Hello World! as the output.
Th Thorny - CAlbhartmdme Hobo Worldgy © 1:21 - o x
Fie te Vw Non Took Hep
JBH O% en
Hel Wicd zy Rosita

1 print ("Hello World")
shat
salle Worlds
»
Local yan 3 + Thosey' Python #

8. Now we will click on the save button and save the file with a name of the
programme. Then our file name will also be displayed on the top of the
programme.

a
BE


--- Page 126 ---
Problem Solving through Programming 121

To Show Text

Just as we printed English text, we can also print Bangla.

Let's write down the following line and run it and see what happens:

prize" wf eT we 1)

So, the print() function prints definite texts on the monitor screen or other standard

output devices. The message may be a string or any other object. Before appearing on

the screen, the object will transform into string.

Using Variables in the Programme (Variable) RE a

To store any information within a programme, we will use a Z -

variable. A variable is like a box within which certain infor- voi (=)

mation can be stored. The word variable means inconsistent. —- :

That is, if we want, we can store a piece of information in one line of the programme,

then change that information in another line and store another piece of information. Tt

may be noted that in Python it is not necessary to cite the data type of a variable. Even
after setting the data type, it can be changed any time.

Naming the Variables

We all have a specific name, and everyone can recognize us by that name. Similarly,

cach variable also has to be given a specific name, with which we ean recognize and use

the vanable throughout the programme. For example. if we create a vanable called
number where we want to deposit 9 as the value of the variable. Then we will write -
number =9

There are a few things to keep in mind when naming variables:

1. The name of the variable will always be a word. That is, we cannot write the name
ofthe variable with more than one word. However, if you want, you can exclude the
spaces between the two words and give them the name of the variable as a word.
Again, the variable can also be named with an underscore ( _ ) sign between two
words, omitting the space between them.

2. The first letter of a variable's name must be a-z or A-Z or underscore (_). The first
letter cannot be a number (0-9) or any other symbol (e.g. * or etc.). However, after
the first letter, any number (0-9) or a-z or A-Z or underscore ( _ ) can be used as the
remaining letters,

3. No other symbols such as @, $, %,», etc. can be used in the name of the variable. g

Forma-16, ICT-(%-10)


--- Page 127 ---
122 Information and Communication Technology

4. Python is a case-sensitive programming language. So, if the same letter is
lowercase and uppercase, Python will treat them as two different variables.
For example, My_variable and my_variable will be treated as two different
variables.

5. Keywords are saved words in Python programme. We cannot use keywords
as the name of variables or functions or any other identifiers. In Python 3.10,
there are 35 saved keywords. For example, False, True, None, and, as, break,
class, continue, if, else, except, while, return, for, global etc.

Incorrect naming of variable Correct naming of variable
tons ox Nima 1
Habe abc?
$variable _ variable
print Keywords cannot be used as variable names.
But Myprint or print] is correct.

Storing or assigning data to variables

We use = symbol to store data in variables. This is called assigning value.

Suppose, we have a variable ‘age’, Now, if we want to keep the value of age 25, we will write

in the programme: value.

age=25
If we want to print this value then we have to write:
print (age)
Now if we write and run the following programme Assignment
age=25
. age = 25
print (age) rE 7
Variable — Value
55
2


--- Page 128 ---
Problem Solving through Programming 123
Then we will get output like the following
figore: 1 Toms gtd @ 301
Again, it is possible to change the value of a sie st vw mn ot sp
variable multiple times throughout the J5d Oe LE
programme. When a new value is assigned to ir
the variable, the previous value is deleted and ta)
the last assigned value is stored. 1f we run the a
following programme, what will be the
output?
shat

value now=1 oe

print(value_now) a

value now=2 »

print(value now)

value _now=3

print(value now)
Let's write the output of this programme in the box below.

1

3
Notice that in the above programme, we have printed the same variable
value now again and again. But as each time the data stored in the variable was
different, we got different values alter printing them.
Data Type
As we know, the computer processor has to work with whole numbers, fraction-
al numbers. letters. words boolean or logical data ete to process the data. A data
type usually defines how much memory (bits or bytes) a piece of data occupies
in computer memory and describes how the processor processes the data. There
are different types of data types in Python programme. Some Data types are
mentioned below.
a) int: Whole nunibers are called integer numbers in English. Se, if whole num-
bers are stored in the variable, its data type is called int. Here int is the short form
of integer.
One such example is: “@

Empld no=35 g


--- Page 129 ---
124 Information and Communication Technology
b) float: In this variable we can store fractional numbers. Such numbers are
called floating numbers in English. Therefore, if fractional numbers are stored in
the variable, its data type is called float. One such example is:
Age=45.50
¢) str: If we want to store any text or textual information in the variable, then it
is called string. And such information is included in sir datatype. ere str is the
short form of string. We have to put the text we want to put in the string variable
inside single quotation marks. For example:
a='c'
b="This is a string variable’
d) bool: bool is the abbreviation of boolean. If True or False is to be stored as
data in a variable, then it will be boolean data. Only two information can be
stored in bool data type: True or False. One such example is:
a=True
Python programme has other datatypes besides int, float, str and bool; we will
know about them if ever needed while writing a programme. The data we store
in the variable is stored in the computer's memory. So, when we use the variable
somewhere in the programme, the value of the variable stored in the computer
memory will be used.
Change of Data Type: Type Casting
The data type of a variable can be easily determined using type(). If we print a
variable inside the type() function. we will get the datatype of that variable.
For example. if we run the following programme:
test variable= 73.07
print (test variable)
print(type(test_variable))
‘We will get the following output:
73.07
5
E] <class 'flot=


--- Page 130 ---
Problem Solving through Programming 125
From here we understand that the information stored in the variable named
test variable is 73.07 and its data type is float,
During programming there may be times when the data type of a variable needs
to be changed or specified. This can be done by casting. This is done using the
casting constructor function in Python
Three important type casting functions are mentioned below.
int()- creates integers from floats or strings.
float()- creates fractional numbers from strings, floats or integers.
str()-creates sirings [rom different data types.
Now consider the following examples
x=innl} # the value of x willbe | |= foat(l}  #the valisofxwill be 10 | x= sts 1") she value of x will be 51!
y= int(2.8) # the value of y will be 2 | y = float{2.8) # the value of y will be 2.8 y=stn2) whe valve of y will be 2
= ink("3") # the value of y will be 3 |= Daak'3") othe valué of zvall 5630 | z= (3.00 % the value of 2 will be 5.0
= flo '4.2") # the waite of w wil be 4.2
Taking Data Input in a Program
If we want to take data input from the user in a program. how do we do it? This
task is very easy using the input() function. When the program execution reaches
the input() function, it pauses execution and waits for the user to provide input.
Once the user enters some input, the program resumes. For example, if we write
the following:
test_input=input ()
So. the test input variable will receive an input from us. However, no matter
what type of data number, letter, etc. the input() function accepts as input within
the program, it will receive it as a string (sir) data type. Now, let's take an input
into a variable and print it.
test input= input()
print{test_input)
prini(type(test_input)) 8
Ef


--- Page 131 ---
126 Information and Communication Technology
What will be the output of this program. then? Whatever you input will be print-
ed as the output. However, notice that even if you input an integer or a fraction,
its data type is printed as str. This means that any data you enter will be received
as a string by the input() function. But if you want the input to be stored not as a
string, but as an integer or a float data type, you'll need to convert the data to that
specific data type. By writing the program as shown below, when taking any
input, we can directly convert il lo the desired data type in the input() function-

test_input = ini{input(})

priniftest input)

prini{type(test_input))
After running the program, notice that due to writing int(input()), the test input
variable is being converted to the int data type.
Also, if we want, we can give a specific comment or instruction when taking an
input. To do this, we can write the command inside the input() function within
quotation marks. For example. if we write:

Test _mput = intput{ Provide a sentence as an inpui:

prini{lest input)

print(type(test_input))
Then, after running the program, it will first display an input command for us.
Provide a sentence as an input:
Now, if we want, we can print additional words or sentences before and after
printing the information we input. To do this, we will write the words or sentene-
es we want to print inside the print() function within quotation marks, and then
we will write the name of our variable after a comma. For example:

test input=int(input('Insert an integer number:'))

print('This is your integer number:', test_input)
Then, we will see the output as shown below:
Insert an integer number: 1245
This is your integer number: 1234
Here, notice that when we print text inside the print() function, we write it within

- single quotes (''). However, when we print a variable, we write the name of the
variable directly without any quotes.


--- Page 132 ---
Problem Solving through Programming 127
Arithmetic Operations

We can easily use the following operators to perform mathematical operations
(addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, and modulus):

* | This is the Addition operator. Using this operator, you can calculate
the sum of the two variables on either side of it.

- ‘This is the Subtraction operator. Using this operator, you can find
the difference between the two variables on either side of it.

* This is the Multiplication operator. Using this operator, you can

calculate the product of the two variables on either side of it.

{| This is the Division operator. Using this operator, you can divide the
variable on the left side by the variable on the right side to get the
quotient.

This is the Modulo operator. Using this operator, you can divide the
variable on the left side by the variable on the right side to get the
remainder.
Practical Problem # 1: Let's create a program to take two numbers as input
and print their sum.
Solution: The program to take two integers as input and print their sum is given
below-
numi = int(input(‘Insert the first integer:'))
num?2 = int(input('Insert the second integer:'))
result = num l+num?2
print('The sum of, num], 'and’. num?2, "is". result)
‘When you run the above program, you can input any two numbers of your choice,
and then it will calculate the sum of those numbers, displaying the result as shown
below.
Insert the first integer: 50
Insert the second integer: 100
The sum of 50 and 100 is 150
Modify the above program to create a program that prints the results of subtrac- wu
tion and multiplication as well. =


--- Page 133 ---
128 Information and Communication Technology
Operators for comparison and their use:
[Equal Opi== (Op2 + Op3) |the lefi are equal.
I= When the operand on the right and the operand on
(Not Equal Opi I= (Op2- Op3) | the left are not equal.
== Op1==10 ‘When the operand on the left is less than or equal fo
(Less or Equal Op1<= (Op2-0p3) the operand on the right.
> Topi=10 When the operand on the lefts greater than fhe
Greater Than, Op1> (Op2 + Op3 operand en the right.
= Opi1>=10 When the operand on the left is greater than or equal
roms |S Conon
Here, Opl, Op2. Op3, are any valid variables. Relational expressions are formed
with one or more variables or arithmetic expressions using relational operators.
Using Conditions in the Program
‘We will create a program te calculate the results of an exam. Let's say the pass-
ing score for the exam is 40. Anyone scoring less than 40 will fail, while anyone
scoring 40 or above will pass. Therefore, a condition nust be considered, and
passing or failing depends on that condition.
In Python, the if statement is used fo execute a certain action or statement based
on a condition, The use of the if statement can be compared to the meaning of
"if." The format for using the if statement is as follows:
ifcondition: — If statements
Statement (s) to be executed if
Storernent fust be ow If v
The condition used in the if statement can generally be one
or more logical or relational expressions, which are writ- ___» ™¢
ten after the if. The if condition statement must be
followed by a colon. — ER
If the value of this condition is true, the tasks described on
the line following the il will be executed. Eras
This part is also called the body of the if. Any valid simple or compound state-
ment can be present here.
g 1I' the condition is false, the control will not go to the body of the if. As a result,
=


--- Page 134 ---
Problem Solving through Programming 129
the tasks described in the body will not be executed, and the subsequent state-
ments will be processed instead.
Practical Problem #2:
The minimum passing score in an exam is 40. If a student scores 40 or more in
the exam, they will pass; otherwise, they will fail. Write a Python program to
determine the passing or failing status of a student based on the score obtained
as input,
Solution: Below is the code for the program.
mark = int(input('Please enter ysur mark: '})
if mark >= 40:
princl'You have passed’)
if mark < 40:
print {'You have tailed’)
Sample results obtained by running the program:
Please enter your mark: 85
You have passed in the subject.
if...else Statement
In Python, the if statement is used to execute a specific action or statement based
on a condition. The else statement, meaning "otherwise," is used along with if to
specify an alternative action when the condition is not met. Therefore, this struc-
ture is known as the if...else statement. The format for using the if...else state-
ment is as follows:
Af Senaicion: [“mogyorie_ |
sien igen Body af else
Here it is mentionable that the condition used in if...else control typically
consists of one or more logical or relational expressions. A colon is placed after
the if Condition statement.
Tf the condition is true, the tasks specified in the <<
Body of if are executed. If it is false, the tasks in = |
the Body of else are executed. IMere, any valid Fees
simple or compound statement can be used. The 3 ==
flowchart of the if...else statement is shown in the
digo [rye =
agram. | 8
Forma-17, ICT{9-10)


--- Page 135 ---
130 Information and Communication Technology
Practical Problem #3: Create a Python program that checks il a citizen is
eligible to vote based on their age.
Solution: In Bangladesh, any citizen who is 18 years old or older is considered
eligible to vote. The program will take the citizen's age as input. The code for the
program is provided below.
age = int (input('Please entar your age: '))
if age >= 18:
print ('¥ou are #ligible for voting')
else -
print{'¥eu are not eligible for voting’)
Practical Problem #4: Write a Python program to determine if a number is
even or odd.
Solution: The code for the program is given below.
Aum = int{input('Insert a number= '))
num$2 {= 0:
print{'The number is odd‘)
size :
print{' The number is even’)
Sample Output from Running the Program:
Insert & gumber = 67
The number is odd
Practical Problem #5: Write a program to determine whether a given year is a
leap year or not.
Solution: To know if a year 1s a leap year, we need to divide the year number by
400. If the remainder is zero, il is a leap year. Otherwise, the year number has Lo
be divided by 100. If the remainder is zero, it is not a leap year. On the other
hand, if the remainder is not zero, then we need to divide the year number by 4
again. Tf the remainder is zero, then the year is a leap year; otherwise, it is not.
year - inc (input{'Enter the vear (4 Digit) to check :'1)
if (year$dD0 == 0 or (yearfiDD I= 0 and year 84 — 0):
print (year, 'is a leap year.')
else :
print (year, 'is not a leap ysar.')
The sample results obtained by running the program-
Enter the year (4 Digit) to check :2012
2012 isa leap year.
‘Enter the year (4 Digit) to check :1990
5S 1990 isnotalesp yearn
S
a


--- Page 136 ---
Problem Solving through Programming 131
Practical Problem #6: Write a program to convert metres to feet and feet to
metres.
Solution; The code for the program is given below.
print ('l:Fest to Meters, 2:Meters to Feet. ')
choice = int (input ('Enter Choice: '))
if choice == 1:
num = Float (input ('Enter number of feet: ))
print {‘Meters: ', round((num/3.28},3))
else :
num = float tinput (‘Enter number of meters: '))
print ('Feet: ', round ((num*3.28),3))
The sample results obtained by running the program-
1:Fest ta Meters. 2:Meters to —Feet. Enter Choice:]
Enter number of feel: 25
Mesers: 7.622
1:Feet to Meters, 2:Meters to Feet,
Enter Choice: 2
Eater number of Meters: 60
Feel : 196.800
To check muluple conditions in a Python program, the elif statement is used
alongside the if...else statement, meaning else if. The elif statement is placed
between the if and else statements. The elif statement is popular as an alternative
to using multiple if statements in a program. In other words. elif is used to check
multiple conditions in a program. The format for using the elif statement is as
follows:
if {Conditional}:
Blockl
=lif (Conditional?) :
Block?
Sees
DafaultBlack:
B1ackM;
Practical Problem #7: Write a Python program to determine if a given
number is positive, negative, or zero.
Solution: The code for the program is provided below. n
8
8


--- Page 137 ---
132 Information and Communication Technology
nun = int (input ('Insert a number: '})
if num > 0:
priat('The number is positive’)
elif num < 0:
print ('The number is negative’)
else :
print (‘It is zera')
The sample result obtained by running the program-
Insert a number + 7
The number is positive,
The match Statement
In Python programming, the match statement is used for similar work of elif
statement i.e. to execute a particular statement from multiple statements. In fact.
instead of using more number of elif statements, the match statement is used.
Additional case and break statements can be used with the match statement. In
an elif statement, the appropriate statement is selected based on a conditional or
relational expression. But, in a match statement, the appropriate statement is
usually selected based on the value of a valid variable. The format of the match
statement is:
match MatchFxp:
case valuel :
Blackl
case Value2 :
Blzck2
case Valued :
Blackd
case _ :
DefaultBlock
Blockl
Here, the expression used with the match statement is called match expression
matchExp. In the case statement, possible values for the match expression mat-
chExp variable are provided. There should be at least one space between the case
keyword and the possible values of the match expression variable, and it ends
with a colon. A case statement usually has a default statement at the end, which
ends with a colon,
Practical Problem #8: Write a program to determine whether a lowercase
English letter is a vowel or a consonant.
Solution: A lowercase English letter will be typed as input. The code for the
program is given below.
8
Sa


--- Page 138 ---
Problem Solving through Programming 133
char = input (‘Enter the lather:
match char:
case "a" :
printichar, * ls 3 vowel ')
casa "=" :
printichar, ' is a vowsl ")
case "i" 1
print (char, ' is a vowel ')
case "o"
printichar, * is a vowsl ‘}
case "u"
print (char, * is a vowel ')
case _:
print {char, * is a consonants’)
The sample results obtained by running the program-
Enter the letter: a
nis a vowel
Enter the letter: d
dis u consonants
Solution with Alternative Method : The program above will show results only
if a lowercase English letter is typed as input. The following program will
display results even when any English letter, whether lowercase or uppercase, is
typed. The code for this program is provided below.
shar = input ('Enter the latter: ')
vowels = [tal tet, Vit, tot, tut, WAY, VEY, 11v, 1gv, gv)
Af char in vowels:
print (char, ' is a vowel’)
else :
printichar; ' is a consenants')
Practical Problem #9: Write a program to find the largest number among three
integers.
Solution: The code for the program is given below,
numl = int (input ('Eater integer number 1: '))
num? = int (input (‘Enter integer number 2: '))
aum3 = int (input {'Eater Integer number 3: '))
if (nual >= num?) and {naml >= numd) :
print (numi, 'ls the largest number’)
elif (rum? >= numl) and (num2 >= num3l:
print (run2, ‘is the largest number’)
else :
print (numd, 'is the largest number’) -
“
=]
a


--- Page 139 ---
134 Information and Communication Technology
The sample result obtained by running the program-
Enter integer number 1¢ 10
Enter integer number 2: 20
Enter integer number 3: 30
40 is the largest number.
Repeating the Same Task: Using Loops in Programming
As we repeat certain tasks in our daily lives, we also need to perform some tasks
multiple times in programming. When we want to repeat the same task several
times in a program, we have to use a loop. In programming, loop control state-
ments are used 10 execute a statement two or more times. Some of the main loop
control statements used in Python programming are:
= for statement
= while statement
= continue, break and pass statement.
Various statements are discussed below-
In a Python program, for statement is used to execute a statement two or more
times. The for loop is suitable only when we know how many times the loop will
be executed. Usually, he number of iterations of a for loop is calculated using a
variable. This type of variable is called counter variable, Following is the format
of for statement:
for Counter nl ELA 1ETation 1h Conabelan
// Statement(s)

In the Counter Initialization section, the initial value of the counter variable is
set. This is called the initialization or the beginning of the loop. In the Condi-
tion section, the final value of the counter variable or the condition for deter-
mining the final value is given. Statements associated with the for loop contin-
ue to be executed until the counter variable reaches its final value or as long as
the condition is true.
Practical Problem #10: Write a program to display a specific text multiple
times.
Solution: Let's say, the text ‘ICT’ will be displayed 5 times.

5

BS


--- Page 140 ---
Problem Solving through Programming 135
for | in range(l,):
print {'I1CT')
Solution with Alternative Method 1; (1ncremens by 1)
for | in range(l,&,1):
print ("ICT")
Solution with Altemmative Method 2: (iecrenent by 1)
for | in ranga(l,@,-1}:
print (ICT!)
The sample results obtained by running the program-
ICT
er
ICT
ICT
IcT
Practical Problem #11: Write a program that will display a word 50 times.
Solution: The code for the program is given below.
var = input {'Write a word: '))
for { in range(1,51):
print (var)
The sample result obtained by running the program-
Write a ward: Computer
Computer Computer Computer Computer Computer
Computer Computer Computer Computer Computer
Computer Computer Computer Computer Computer
Computer Computer Computer Computer Computer
Practical Problem # 12: Write a programme to find the odd numbers from 1 to
100.
Solution: The code of the programme is given below-
for i in range(l,101):
if (452 = 0):
print (1)
Running the programme will show the following result.
135791113 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 20 31 33 35 37 39 41 43 45 47 49 51 53 55 57 59
6163 65 67 69 71 73 75 77 79 81 £3 85 87 89 91 93 95 97 99
“
Eo
=


--- Page 141 ---
136 Information and Communication Technology
Practical Problem # 13: Write a programme which will show the following
result.
ix
123
1234
123456789
Solution: The code of the programme is given below-
for | in rangeil, 10):

for { in range(l, i + 1):

print (3, snd=" ")

print (}
Running the programme will show the following result.
1
12
123
13:4
12345
1234356
1234567
12345678
123456789
Practical Problem # 14: Write a programme to determine the denominator or
multiplication table of a number,
Solution: The code of the programme is given below-
num = int (input ('Enter a number: '})
for i in range(l,1l):

prod = nun*i

print (num, '**; i, '=Y', prod)
Running the programme and inputting the following sample data will show the
result-
Enter a number; 3.
3%1=3
3%2=6
33-9
3rd=12
35-15
3%6=18
3%9=21
3r8=24
3%9=27
3*10=30

Gg
5


--- Page 142 ---
Problem Solving through Programming 137
A for loop statement may contain some other
for statements. This type of for loop is called for...
nested for loop, the intermediate [or loop is {
1 for.)
called inner for loop and the external for loop {
is outer for loop. The inner for loop completes Block1;
before the outer for loop. } 7
Block;
I caper for Lop
Block3;
( start loop. ] Tog condicon varied
while loop. The loop
terminates if the
Pa
is ”
nditit
= staples
yes a statements in the
while loop will
execute if the
w | Ehiesmann
something hile loop is true.
While Loop
A While Loop statement is used in Python programmes to exccute a statement
two or more times subject to a condition. The condition is verified at the begin-
ning of this loop. The loop will only be executed if the given condition is true or
non-zero. Otherwise, the loop will terminate, and no statement will be executed.
The format of While Loop control is as follows:
CounterInitialization:
while Conditicn:
Ji Statement (s)
Counterbecrament/ Increment;
Forma-18, TCT-(9-10)


--- Page 143 ---
138 Information and Communication Technology
1 The counter initial value with the appropriate
=i I data type is set in the CounterInitialization
while (condition); | Part
The final value of the counter variable or the
nN condition to determine the final value is
fiiimiad given in the Condition part. the decre-
ment/increment value of the counter variable
Stop is defined while revolving each time in the
| | decrement/increment part. Statements asso-
ciated with the While Loop will continue to
be executed until the condition is true. The loop terminates whenever the
condition becomes false.
The statement associated with the While Loop is usually a compound
statement. If necessary, another While Loop or for loop can be used within
a While Loop. Such an intermediate while loop is called a nested while
loop.
while (... ... ...)
{
while (ame 2 se)
Block1;
if {CE naiton) Inner white Loop
break;
Block2; 3 Segre lon
Block3;
Flowchart of nested a while statement.
While Loops are often used as alternatives to for statements. The number of
iterations of the while statement is calculated using any previously declared
counter variables like the for statement.
Practical Problem #15: Write a programme to display the text ICT multiple
times using a while loop.
Solution: Let's say the text ICT will be displayed 3 times.
3
2


--- Page 144 ---
Problem Solving through Programming 139
count=1
while (count<=3):
print ('1€T')
covnt=count+1l
The result after running the programme —
cr
ICT
ICT
Practical Problem # 16: Write a programme to find the sum of the series
14243 +44... t 100. Or, write a programme to find the sur of all positive numbers from
110 100.
Solution: The code of the programme is given below
sum=0
caunt=1
while (count<=100):
sum = sum + count
count=gount+1
print{'The sum of the valve is ', sum)
Running the programmeme will show the following result-
The sum of the value 1s 5050
Continue Statement
In Python programmes, a continue statement is used to conditionally or uncondi-
tionally repeat a statement or loop. The format of the continue statement is-
continue
The continue statement moves the programme pointer to the previous statement
or to the beginning of the loop. The continue statement cannot work directly
without if; elif; for, while ete. For this reason, the continue statement is usually
used to repeat a loop subject to the condition related to if, elif statements. In that
case the conitnue statement is executed if the value of the condition is true.
otherwise the compiler ignores the continue statement and executes the next
statement.
A programme to omit any number from 1 to 10 and display the remaining num-
ir bers using the continue statement is given in the next page-
2
=


--- Page 145 ---
140 Information and Communication Technology
Solution: Let's say, the omitted number is 4. The programme is given below-
for num in ranga(l, 11, 1):
if num == 4:
continue
else:
print (num, end=" ")
print (‘Used continue to skip printing the value 4')
Running the programmeme will show the following result-
123578910
Used confinue to skip printing the value 4
Break Statement
If a break statement is found in the loop of Python programmes, the loop finishes
its task there and comes out of the loop. Like a running vehicle that halts when
its brakes are applied, the loop execution stops when a break statement is found
in the loop. In most cases, the break statement is used with if, elif, efc.
Exercise:

The function of Interpreter is

i)To transform every command into machine language all at a time

it)To transform commands into machine language one by one

iii) To wansform machine code into Python code

Which of the following is true?

A)iand ii B) i and iii

C) ii and iii D) i, ii and iii
2. Which function is used in Python to show a text on the screen?

A) printf) C) print

B) print() D) println()

]


--- Page 146 ---
Problem Solving through Programming 141
3. Which of the following is the correct name of a variable in Python language?
A) 9abc C) print
B) $variable D) National TD
4. In Python language, if y = int(2.8), what is the value of print (y)?
A)2.8 B)2
C)28 D)2.0
5. If in Python language a=3, b=2, y=a%b, what is the value of print (y)?
A) l D)2
C)3 C)5
Notice the following Python code:
for i in ranga(l,6):
print (*1CT')
6. Here, how many times the word ICT will be displayed?
A)l B)5
C3 D)6
7. What is machine code? Write how programme code can be transformed
into machine code.
8. What is Casting Constructor Function? Write the name of some functions.
9. Write two programmes to determine the sum of all positive numbers from
1 to 100 using for loop and while loop. Analyze which programme is conve-
nient.
10. Explain break and continue statements.
The End
Py
BS


--- Page 147 ---
2025 Academic Year
Nine and Ten : ICT
IG JCS F(T INE Fl WCo =F |
~5FT fore
0 { =
js J
1
4 /
For free distribution by the Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh.